Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

147

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to play them. We need such an analysis to guide our own
thoughts and actions and possibly for communication to some
of the third parties who, from time to Sime, try to get
negotiations started. Some day we may be embarrassed if some
country like India should express the view to Hanoi that the
Americans would probably stop their bombing to get discussions
started and then have Hanoi pick up the proposal as a formal
offer. To prepare our own people as well as to guide our
friends, we need to make public explanation of some of the
points discussed above. 1)1/

In conelusion he sounded a sharp warning about allowing ourselves to
become embroiled in a repetition of our Korean negotiating experience,
where casualties increased during the actual bargaining phase itself.

Tt is hard to assess how much influence this memo had on the President's
and the Administration's attitudes toward negotiations, but in hind-
sight it is clear that thinking of this kind prevailed within the U.S.
Government until the early spring of 1968.

Taylor's memo attracted attention both at State and Defense
at least down to the Assistant Secretary level. William Bundy at State
sent a memo to Secretary Rusk the following week commenting on Taylor's
ideas with his own assessment of the bargaining value and timing of a
permanent cessation of the bombing. Since they represent views on the
bombing which were to prevail for nearly two years, Bundy'’s memo is repro-
duced in substantial portions below. Recapitulating Taylor's analysis
and his own position, Bundy began,

Essentially, the issue has always been whether we would
trade 2 cessation of bombing in the North for some degree of
reduction or elimination of Viet Cong and new North Viet-
namese activity in the South, or a cessation of infiltration
from the North, or a combination of both. 142/

Worried that Taylor's willingness to trade a cessation of uSs/GVN bombing
and offensive operations for a cessation of vc/NVA activity might be
prejudicial to the GVN, Bundy outlined his own concept of what would be
a reciprocal concession from the DRV:

.-.1 have myself been more inclined to an asking price,
at least, that would include both a declared cessation of
infiltration and a sharp reduction in VC/NVA military opera-
¢+ions in the South. Even though we could not truly verify

: the cessation of infiltration, the present volume and routes
are such that we could readily ascertain whether there was
any significant movement, using our own air. Moreover, DRV

114. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
