er
Vi
ft

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

3

Tn any event, the interest of the Committee is not in a discussion of the staff
study, but in your testimony of August 6, 1964, and Ambassador Stevenson's
statement to the United Nations of August 5 in light of any information your
ofice may have acquired since the incidents in the Gulf of Tonkin.

Therefore, in the interest of a thorough discussion on February 20, the Com-
mittee will make available to your office a copy of the trauscript of the testi-
mony of August 6, 1964, (Ambassador Stevenson's presentation is, of course, a
matter of publie record.) I would hope that you will be able to review this
transeript and bring the Committee up to date on what we now know of the
incidents in the Gulf of Tonkin. The Committee is particularly interested in dis-
cussing what lessons have been learned about the problems of analyzing. in-
formation in the midst of a crisis situation.

Finally, as I mentioned to you during our conversation, I would like to renew
my Tequest of January Sth that the Department of Defense provide the Com-
mittee at the earliest possible date with a report done by the Weapons System
Evaluation Group on the subject “Command and Control of the Tonkin Gulf
Incident, 4-3 August 1964.”

T look forward to seeing you on February 20.

Sincerely yours, 7
J. W. Furenicat, Chairman.

The Cramoray, Mr, Secretary, my own view is that this statement
of yours should not be made public itil after the committee has had
alt opportunity to go through the hearings, and also to decide what it
does about its own staff report and the hearings, This is an executive
meeting and I] hope that you will be willing to retain that. J realize
there will be pressures upon you, as there are upon the committee, for
release of these documents, but I would think it is premature to do so.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT 8. McNAMARA, SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE; ACCOMPANIED BY GEN. EARLE G. WHEELER, CHAIR-
MAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF, AND CAPT. H. B. SWHITZER,
US. NAVY, MILITARY ASSISTANT TO THE CHAIRMAN, JOINT
CHIEFS OF STAFF

Secretary MoNaarara, My, Chairman, I yery much appreciate your
personal kind wishes and compliments. It has been a most satisfying

¢ years to me, made more so by the courtesy with which I have been

treated by this committee on my numerous occasions before it.

I might also say I share T. S. Eliot’s belicf that history may be
freedom, and I look forward to the development of our discussions
here today in a way that will make it freedom and not servitude,

Ido have a statement which I would like to present to the committee
at this time. I have not released it to the press. I told my associates
that we should not do so. We have submitted to the committee some

. 200 copies of it so they may release it. I doubt very much that we will

be able to withstand the pressures of the press today without releasing
it. We have been deluged by requests for it.

RELEASING OF DOCUMENTS

Senator Morse. Can I only say, Mr. Chairman, on a procedural
matter, I quite agree with the Secretary, I do not think we ought in
any way to place any restrictions on the Secretary in regard to releas-
ing anything he wants to release, I know you did not so imply. But I
think the judgment of the Secretary should prevail in regard to what
the Department, of Defense releases, and I think the jeeement of the

d release.

committee should prevail in regard to what we shou

ei
