Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) 
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968 
(16 Vols.) 
3. ROLLING THUNDER Program Begins: January-
June 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. C. 3. 
EVOLlJTION OF THE WAR 
THE ROLLING THUIiiDER PROGRAM BEGINS 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
029 
S,ec Dei' Cont Nl'. :&--------------- . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
THE ROLLING THUNDER PROGRAM BEGINS 
SUMMARY and ANALYSIS 
The United States decisions, in the early months of 1965, to 
launch a program of reprisal air strikes against North Vietnam, 
evolving progressiv~ly into a sustained bombing campaign of rising 
intensity, were made against a background of anguished concern over 
the threat of imminent collapse of the Government of South Vietnam 
and of its military effort against the Viet Congo 
The air war 
against the North was launched in the hope ·that it would strengthen 
Gv~ confidence and cohesion, and that it would deter or restrain 
the DRV from continuing its support of the revolutionary war in the 
South. 
There was hope also that a quite modest bombing effort would 
be sufficient j that the demonstration of US determination and the 
potential risks and costs to the North implicit in the early air 
strikes. would provide the US with substantial bargaining leveragej 
and that it would redress the "equation of advantage" so that a 
political settlement might be negotiated on acceptable terms. 
Once set in motion, however, the bombing effort seemed to 
stiffen rather than soften Hanoi's backbone, as well as to lessen 
the willingness of Hanoi's allies particularly the Soviet Union, 
to work toward compromise. 
Moreo~er, compromise was ruled out in 
any event, since the negotiating terms that the US proposed were 
t " 
. 
II
' 
d d 
. til 
d 
no 
comproml.se 
terms, but more akin to a "cease an 
esl.S 
or er 
tha~, from the DRV/VC point of view, was tantamount to a demand for 
thel.r surrender. 
As Hanoi remained intractable in the face of a mere token 
demonstration of U.S. capability and resolve, U.S. policy shifted 
to a more deliberate combination of intensified military pressures 
and modest diplomatic enticements. 
The carrot was added to the 
stick in the form of an economic development gesture, but the coercive 
element remained by far the more tangible'and visible component of 
U.S. policy. 
To the slowly but relentlessly rising air pressures 
against the North was added the deployment of US combat forces to 
the Sout~. 
In respo~se to public pressures, a major diplomatic 
opportunl.ty ,vas provl.ded Hanoi for a quiet backdown through a 
brief bombing pause called in mid-May, but the pause seemed to be 
aimed more at clearing the decks for a subsequent jntensified 
resumption than it "Tas at evoking a reciprocal act of de-escalation 
by Hanoi. 
Tne U.S. initiative, in any event, was unmistakably 
rebuffed by North Vietnam and by its Communist allies, and the 
opposing positions were more hopelessly deaalocked than ever before. 
i 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
It is the purpose of this study to reconstruct the immediate 
circumstances that led up to the U.S. reprisal decision of February -
1965, to retrace the changes in rationale that progressively trans-
formed the reprisal concept into a sustained graduated bombing 
effort, and to chronicle the relationship between that effort and 
the military-political moves to shore up Saigon and the military-
diplomatic signals io dissuade Hanoi, during the crucial early 
months of February through May of 1965. 
******* 
Background to Pleiku. 
The growing realization, throughout 1964, 
that the final consolidation of VC power in South Vietnam was a distinct 
possibility, had led to a protracted US policy reassessment and a 
determined search for forceful military alternatives in the North that 
might h~lp salvage the deteriorating situation in the South. 
The 
proposed program of graduated military pressures against North Vietnam 
that emerged from this reassessment in late 1964 had three major 
objectives: 
(1) to signal to the Communist enemy the firmness of U.S. 
resolve, (2) to boost the sagging morale of the GVN in the South, and 
(3) to impose increased costs and strains upon the DRV in the North. 
Underlying the rationale of the program was the hope that it might 
restore some equilibrium to the balance of forces, hopefully increasing 
the moment of US/GVN bargaining leverage sufficiently to permit an 
approach to a negotiated solution on something other than surrender 
terms. 
. 
Throughout the planning process, (and even after the initiation 
of the program) the President's principal advisors differed widely in 
their views as to the intensity of the bombing effort that would be 
desirable or required, and as to its likely effectiveness in influencing 
Hanoi's will to continue its aggression. 
The JCS, for example, con-
sistently argued that only a most dramatic and forceful application 
of military pOl-rer would exert significant pressure on North Vietnam, 
but firmly believed that such application could and would affect the 
enemy's will. 
Most civilian officials in State, OSD, and the White 
House, on the other hand, tended to favor a more gradual, restrained 
approach, "progressively mounting in scope and intensity," in which 
the prospect of greater pressure to come was at least as important 
as any damage actually inflicted. 
But these officials also tended, 
for the most part, to have much less confidence that such pressures 
would have much impact on Hanoi's course, making such equivocal 
assessments as:' "on balance ~ile believe that suc.."h. action would have 
some faint hopl; of really improving the Vietllamese situation. " 
ii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Reprisal Planning. 
In spite of these rather hesitant judgments) 
the graduated approach was adopted and a program of relatively mild 
military actions aimed at North Vietnam was set in motion beginning 
in December 1964. 
At the same time) detailed preparations were made 
to carry out bombing strikes against targets in North Vietnam in 
reprisal for any future attacks on U.S. forces. 
These preparations 
were made chiefly in connection with the occasional DESOTO Patrols 
that the US NavY conducted in the Gulf of Tonkin which had been 
fired upon or menaced by North Vietnamese torpedo boats on several 
previous occasions during 1964. 
In order to be prepared for an 
attack on any future patrol) a pre-packaged set of reprisal targets 
was worked up by CINCPAC on instructions from the JCS) and pre-
assigned forces were maintained in a high state of readiness to 
strike these targets in accordance with a detailed strike plan that 
provided a range of retaliatory options. 
In late January) a DESOTO Patrol was authorized to begin on 
Feb. 3 (later postponed to Feb. 7) and Operation Order FLAMING DART 
was issued by CINCPAC) providing for a number of alternative US air 
strike reprisal actions in the eventuality that the DESOTO Patrol 
were to be attacked or that any other provocation were to occur) 
such as a spectaculaT VC incident in South Vietnam. 
At the last 
moment) hovlever) the Patrol was called off in deference to Soviet 
Premier Kosygin's imminent visit to Hanoi. 
U.S. officials hoped 
that the USSR might find it in its interest to act as an agent of 
moderation vis a vis Hanoi in the Vietnam conflict) and wished to 
avoid any act that might be interpreted as deliberately provocative. 
Nevertheless) it was precisely at the beginning of the Kosygin visit) 
during the early morning hours of February 7) the the VC launched 
their spectacular attack on US installations at PleikU) thus triggering 
FLAMING DART I) the first of the ne1-l carefully programmed US/GVN 
reprisal strikes. 
Imperceptible Transition. 
By contrast with the earlier Tonkin 
strikes of August) 1964 which had been presented as a one-time 
demonstration that North Vietnam could not flagrantly attack US 
forces with impunity) the February 1965 raids were explicitly 
linked with the "larger pattern of aggression" by North Vietnam) 
and were a reprisal against North Vietnam for an offense committed 
by the VC in South Vietnam. 
When the VC staged another dramatic 
attack on Qui 1lhon on Feb. 10) the combined US/GVN response) named 
F~IING DART II) was not characterized as an event-associated 
reprisal but as a generalized response to "continued acts of aggression." 
The new terminology reflected a conscious U.S. decision to broaden 
the reprisal concept as gradually and imperceptibly as possible to 
. accommodate a much wider policy of sustained) steadily intensifying 
air attacks against North Vietnam) at a rate and on a scale to be 
determined by the U.S. 
Although discussed publicly in very muted 
iii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
tones, the second Fh~ING DART operation constituted a sharp break 
with past US policy and set the stage for the continuing bombing 
program that was now to be launched in earnest. 
Differences in Advocacy. 
While all buc one or two of the 
President's principal Vietnam advisors favored the initiation of a 
sustained bombing program, there were significant differences among 
them. 
McGeorge Bundy and Ambassador Maxwell Taylor, for example, 
both advocated a measured, controlled sequence of raids, carried 
out jointly with the GVN and directed solely against DRV military 
targets and infiltration r outes . 
In their view, the intensity of 
the attacks was to be varied with ' the level of VC outrages in SVN 
or might be progressively raised. 
But whereas McGeorge Bundy's 
objective was to influence the course of the struggle in the South 
(boosting GVN morale) improving US bargaining power with the GVN, 
exerting a depressing effect on VC cadre), Ambassador Taylor's 
principal aim was'~o bring increasing pressure on the DRV to cease 
its intervention." It was coercion of the North, rather than a 
rededication of the GVN to the struggle in the South that Taylor 
regarded as the real benefit of a reprisal policy. 
CINCPAC) on 
the other hand) insisted that the program would have to be a very 
forceful one -- a "graduated pressures" rather than a "graduated 
reprisal" philosophy -- if the DRV were to be persuaded to acceed 
to a cessation on U.S. terms. 
The Joint Chiefs, in turn) (and 
especially Air Force Chief of Staff General McConnell) believed 
that the much heavier air strike recommendations repeatedly made 
by the JCS during the preceding six months were more appropriate 
than the mild actions proposed by Taylor and Bundy. 
Initiating ROLLING THUNDER. 
A firm decision to adopt "a pro-
gram of measured and limited air action jointly with the GVN against 
selected military targets in the DRV" was made by the President on 
February 13, and communicated to Ambassador Taylor in Saigon. 
Details 
of the program were deliberately left vague, as the President wished 
to preserve maximum flexibility. 
The first strike was set for February 
20 and Taylor was directed to obtain GVN concurrence. 
A semi-coup 
in Saigon) however) compelled postponement and cancellation of this 
and several subsequent strikes . 
Political clearance was not given 
until the turbulence was calmed with the departure of General Nguyen 
Khanh from Vietnam on Feb 25. 
U.S. reluctance to launch air attacks 
during this time was further reinforced by a UK-USSR diplomatic 
i~itiative to reactivate the Cochairmanship of the 1954 Geneva Con~ 
ference with a view to involving the members of that conference in 
a consideratiun of the Vietnam crisis. 
Air strikes executed at that 
moment, it ~as feared) might sabotage that diplomatic gambit) which 
. Washington looked upon not as a potential negotiating opportunity) 
but as a convenient vehicle for public expreSSion of a tough U.S. 
iv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
position. 
The Co-Chairmen gambit) however) languished -- and 
eventually came to naught. 
The first ROLLING THUNDER strike was 
finally rescheduled for Feb 26. 
This time adverse weather forced 
its cancellation and it was not until March 2 that the first of 
the neW program strikes) dubbed ROLLING THUNDER V) was actually 
carried out. 
In the closing' days of February and during early March) the 
Administration undertook publicly and privately to defend and pro-
pound its rationale for the air strikes) stressing its determination 
to stand by the GVN) but reaffirming the limited nature of its 
objectives toward North Vietnam. 
Secretary Rusk conducted a 
marathon public information campaign to signal a seemingly reason-
able but in fact quite tough US position on negotiations) demanding 
that Hanoi "stop doing what it is doing against its neighbors" 
before any negotiations could prove fruitful. 
Rusk's disinterest 
in negotiations at this time was in concert with the view of virtually 
all the President's key advisors) that the path to peace was not then 
open. 
Hanoi held sway over ~ore than half of South Vietnam and could 
see the Saigon Government crumbling before her very eyes. 
The balance 
of power at this time simply did not furnish the U.S. with a basis for 
bargaining and Hanoi had no reason to acceed to the hard terms the 
U.S. had in mind. 
Until military pressures on North Vietnam could 
tilt the balance of forces the other way) talk of negotiation could 
be little more than a hollO'l-T exercise. 
Evolving a Continuing Program. 
Immediately after the launching 
of the first ROLLING THUNDER strike. efforts were set in motion to 
increase the effectiveness) forcefuiness and regularity of the program. 
US aircraft loss rates came under McNamara 's scrutiny) with the result 
that many restrictions on the use of U.S. aircraft and special ordnance 
were lifted) and the air strike technology improved. 
Sharp annoyance 
was expressed by Ambassador Taylor over what he considered an unneces-
sarily timid and ambivalent US stance regarding the frequency and 
weight of U.S. air attacks. 
He called for a more dynamic schedule 
of strikes) a several week program) relentlessly marching North) to 
break the will of the DRV. 
Army Chief of Staff General Johnson) 
returning _from a Presidential survey mission to Vietnam in mid-March) 
supported Taylor's view and recommended increasing the scope and 
tempo of the air strikes as well as their effectiveness. 
The President 
accepted these recommendations and) beginning with ROLLING THUNDER VII 
(March 19») air action against the North was transformed from a 
sporadic) halting effort into a regular and determined program. 
Shift to Interdiction. 
In the initial U.S. reprisal strikes 
and the first ROLLn~G ~HUNDK~ actions) target selection had been 
. completely dominated by political and psychological considerations. 
With the gradual acceptance) beginning in March) of the need for a 
militarily more significant sustained bombing pro~ram) a refocusing 
v 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sen'sitive 
of target emphasis occurred, stressing interdiction of the DRV's 
lines of communication (LOC's) -- the visible manifestations of 
North Vietnamese aggression. 
The JCS had called the SecDef's 
attention to t his infiltration target complex as early as mid-
February, and an integrated counter-infiltration attack plan 
against LOC targets south of the 20th parallel began to be 
developed by CINCPAQ, culminating at the end of March in the 
submission of the JCS 12-week bombing program. 
This program 
was built around the "LOC-cut" concept developed by the Pacific 
Command and was strongly endorsed by General Westmoreland and 
Ambassador Taylor. 
The JCS recommended that only the first phase 
, (third through fifth weeks) of the 12-week program be adopted, as 
they had not reached agreement on the later phases. 
The JCS sub-
mission, however, was not accepted as a program, although it 
strongly influenced the new interdiction-oriented focus of the 
attacks that were to follow. 
But neither the SecDef nor the 
President was willing to approve a multi-week program in advance. 
They preferred to retain continual personal control over attack 
concepts and individual target selection and to communicate their 
decisions through weekly guidance provided by the SecDef's ROLLING 
THUNDER planning messages. 
April I Reassessment. 
By the end of March, in Saigon's view, 
the situation in South Vietnam appeared to have rebounded somewhat. 
Morale seemed to have been boosted at least temporarily, by the air 
, 
strikes, and Vietnamese forces had not recently suffered any major 
' defeats. ' Washington, on the other hand, continued to regard the 
, 
situation as "bad and deteriorating," and could see no signs of "give" 
on the part of Hanoi . 
None of the several diplomatic initiatives 
that had been launched looked promising, and VC terrorism continued 
unabated, with the March 29 bombing of the US embassy in Saigon 
being by far the boldest provocation. 
Ambassador Taylor returned to Washington to participate in a 
Presidential policy review on April I and 2, in which a wide range 
of possible military and non-military actions m South and North 
Vietnam were examined. 
The discussions, however, did not deal 
principally witn the air war, but focused mainly on the prospect 
of major deployments of US and Third Country combat forces to South 
Vietnam. As a result of the discussions the far-reaching decision 
, 
" 
, 
was made, at least conceptually, to permit US troops to engage in 
, offensive ground operations against Asian insurgents. 
With respect 
to future air pressures policy, the actions adopted amounted to 
little more than a continuation of "roughly the present slowly 
ascending tempo of ROLLING THUNDER operations," directed maiD~y 
at the LOC targets that 'Here then beginning to be struck. 
The 
, 'Director of Central Intelligence John McCone demurred, arguing 
that a change in the US ground force role in the South'also demanded 
comparably more forceful action, against the North. 
He felt that 
the ground force decision was correct only "if our air strikes 
against the North are sufficiently heavy and damaging really to 
hurt the North Vietnamese ." 
' 
vi 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A "Carrot" at Johns Hopkins. 
Although devoting much effort to 
public explanation and private persuasion) the President could not 
quiet his critics. 
Condemnation of the bombing spread and the 
President was being pressed from many directions to make a major 
public statement welcoming negotiations. 
He found an opportunity 
to dramatize his peaceful intent in his renowned Johns Hopkins 
address of April T) in 'Thich he (1) 
acceptec. the spirit of the 
IT-nation Appeal of March 15 to start negotiations "without posing 
any preconditions)" {2) offered the vision of a "billion dollar 
American investment" in a regional Mekong River basin development 
effort in which North Vietnam might also participate) and (3) 
appointed the illustrious Eugene Black to head up the effort and to 
lend it credibility and prestige. 
The President!s speech evoked 
much favorable public reaction throughout the world) but it failed 
to silence the Peace Bloc and it failed to move Hanoi. 
Premier 
Pham Van Dong responded to the President!s speech by proposing his 
famous Four Points as the only correct way to resolve the Vietnam 
problem and) two days later) denounced the President!s proposal as 
simply a "carrot" offered to offset the "stick" of aggression and 
to allay public criticism of his Vietnam policy. 
But this is as 
far as the President was willing to go in his concessions to the 
Peace Bloc. 
To the clamor for a bombing pause at this time) the 
Administration responded with a resounding "No." 
Consensus at Honolulu. 
By mid-April, communication between 
Washington and Saigon had become badly strained as a result of 
Ambassador Taylor!s resentment of what he regarded as Washington!s 
excessive eagerness to introduce US combat forces into South Vietnam) 
far beyond anything that had been approved in the April 1-2 review. 
To iron out differences) a conference was convened by Secretary 
McNamara at Honolulu on April 20. 
Its main concern was to reach 
specific agreement on troop deployments) but it also sought to 
reaffirm the existing scope and tempo of ROLLING THUNDER. 
The 
conferees agreed that sufficient pressure was provided by repetition 
and continuation of the strikes, and that it was important not to 
"kill the hostage" by destroying the valuable assets inside the 
"Hanoi do-not." Their strategy for victory was "to break the will 
of the DRV/VC by denying them victory ." Honolulu apparently 
succeeded in restoring consensus behTeen Washington and Saigon. 
It also marked the relative downgrading of pressures against the 
North) in favor of more intensive activity in the South. 
The 
decision) at this point) was to "plateau" the air strikes more 
or less at the prevailing level) rather than to pursue the relent-
less dynamic course ardently advocated by Ambassador Taylor and 
Admiral Sharp in February and March) or the massive destruction of 
the North Vietlamese target complex ccnsistently pressed by the 
Joint Chiefs. 
Following Honolulu) it was decided to publicize the fact that 
"interdiction" was now the major objective of the bombing) and 
Secretary McNamara devoted a special Pentagon briefing for the 
press corps to that issue. 
vii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
First Bombing Pause. 
Pressure for some form of bombing halt 
had mounted steadily throughout April and early May and, although 
the President did not believe that such a gesture would evoke any 
response from Hanoi he did order a brief halt effective May 13, "to 
begin" as he expressed it "to clear a path either toward restoration 
of peace or tovrard increased military action, depending on the reat!tion 
of the Communists. It 
The political purpose of the pause -- to test 
Hanoi's reaction -- was kept under very tight wraps, and the project 
was given the code name MAYFLOWER. 
A great effort was made to inform 
Hanoi of the fact of the pause and of its political intent. 
Soviet 
Ambassador Dobrynin was given an oral explanation by Secretary Rusk, 
confirmed by a tough written statement, reasserting Rusk's public 
position that the cessation of the DRV's attacks upon South Vietnam 
vas the only road to peace and that the US would be watchful, during 
the pause, for any signs of a reduction in such attacks. 
A similar 
statement was sent to U.S. Ambassador Kohler in Moscow, for personal 
transmittal to the DRV Ambassador there. 
Kohler, however, met with 
refusal both from the DRV Ambassador to receive, and from the Soviet 
Foreign Office to transmit,the message. 
A written note, sent to the 
DRV embassy, was returned ostensibly unopened . . Nevertheless, it is 
quite clear that Hanoi was more than adequately advised of the 
contents of' the U.S. message through the various diplomatic channels 
that were involved. 
Given the "rather strenuous nature lt of the U.S. note to Hanoi 
and the briefness of the pause, it is hardly surprising that the 
initiative encountered no receptivity from the Soviet government 
and evoked no positive response from Hanoi. 
The latter denounced 
the bombing halt as "a worn out trick of deceit and threat .•• " 
and the former, in the person of Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko 
in a . conversation with Rusk in 
Vienna branded the U.S. note to 
, 
Hanoi as "insultinglt. 
Having thus been unmistakably rebuffed; the President ordered 
the resumption of the bombing raids effective May 18. 
The entire 
pause was handled with a minimum of public information, and no 
announcement was made of the suspension or of the resumption. 
But 
prime ministers or chiefs of state of a half dozen key friendly 
governments were briefed fully after the event. 
A still somewhat 
ambiguous diplomatic move was made by Hanoi in Paris on May 18, a 
few hours after the bombing had been resumed, in which Mai Van Bo, 
the DRV economic delegate there seemed to imply a significant 
softening of Hanoi's position on the Four Points as Itprior conditions." 
But subsequent attempts at clarification left that issue as·ambiguous 
as it had been before. 
viii 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
(") 
:c 
~ 
z o 
r o 
C> 
-< 
IV. C. 
DATE 
6 Jan 1965 
8 Jan 1965 
27 Jan 1965 
28 Jan 1965 
29 Jan 1965 
4 Feb 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A CHRONOLOGY OF ROLLING THUIillER MISSIONS 
FEBRUARY - JUNE, 1965 
CHRONOLOGY 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
William Bundy Memo-
randmn for Rusk 
2,000 Korean troops 
arr i ve in SVN 
Huong Government 
ousted 
McNaughton Memorandmn 
for Secretary of 
Defense 
JCSmessage 4244 to 
CINCPAC 
JCSl1-70-65 
CJCS m~ssage 4612 to 
CINCPAC 
ix 
DESCRIPTION 
Taking note of the continued politi-
cal deterioration in SVN, 
B1L~dy con-
cludes that, E:ven though it will get 
vTorse, the US should probably pro-
ceed vri th Phase II of t he December 
pressures plan, the escalating air 
strikes against the North. 
South Korea sends 2,000 military 
advisors to SVN , the first such non-
US support. 
General Khanh ousts the civilian 
government headed by Huong and 
assmnes puwer s of government himself. 
McNaughton is as pessimistic as 
William Bundy about prospects in the 
South. 
He feels the US should evacu-
ate depende~ts and respond promptly 
at the ne~d, :;,'eprisal opportunity. 
McNamara's pencilled notes reveal 
more optimism about the results of 
air strikes t han McNaughton. 
A resumption of the DESOTO Patrols 
on or about 3 February is authorized. 
The JCS urge again that a strong 
reprisal action be taken immediately 
after the next DRV/VC provocation. 
In particular, they propose targets 
and readiness to strike should the 
forthcomin& resmnption of t he DESOTO 
Patrols be challenged. 
In view of Kosygin's impending visit 
to Hanoi, authority for the DESOTO 
Patrol is cancelled. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
4 Feb 1965 
(Continued) 
6 Feb 1965 
7 Feb 1965 
8 Feb 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCm~~ 
SNIE 53-65 IIShort 
Tel1U Prospects in 
South Vietnamll 
Kosygin arri ves in 
Hanoi 
VC att ack US base at 
Pleiku 
President decides to 
retaliate 
McGeorge Bundy Memo-
randum to the 
PreSident: 
liThe 
Situation in South 
Vietnamlt 
FLAMnm DART I 
x 
DESCRIPTION 
The intelligence cow~unity does not 
see the conditions of politi cal in-
stability in SVN improvi ng in the 
months ahead . 
The political base 
for counterinsurgency "<ill reIllain 
weak. 
Soviet Premier Kosygin arrives in 
Hanoi for a state visit that will 
deepen Soviet commitment to the DRV, 
and eA~and Soviet economic and mili-
tary assistance. 
Well- coor dinated VC attacks ~i t the 
US advi sors ' barracks at Pleiku and 
the helicopter base at Camp Holloway. 
The NSC is convened in the evening 
(6 Feb . Vlashington time) and with 
.the recommendation of McGeorge Bundy, 
Ambassador Taylor and General West-
moreland from Sajgon, decides on a 
reprisal strike against t he North in 
spite of Kosygin's presence in Hanoi. 
Completing a fact-gathering trip to 
SVN on the very day of the Pleiku 
attack, Bundy acknowledges the bad 
. state of the GVN both politically 
and militarily, but nevertheless 
recommends that the US adopt a policy 
of IIsust ailled reprisallt against the 
North and t hat we evacuate US depen-
dents from Saigon. 
The reprisal 
policy should begin from specific VC 
attacks but gradually escalate into 
sust ained att acks as a form of pres-
sure on the DRV to end its support 
of the VC and/or come to terms with 
the US. 
49 us Navy jets conduct the first 
FLA1\UNG D.ART reprisal· -attack on the 
Dong Hoi ar~y barracks; a scheduled 
VNAF attack is cancelled because of 
bad weather. 
TOP SECRET 
- Sensitive 
DATE 
9 Feb 1965 
10 Feb 1965 
11 Feb 1965 
12 Feb 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
VNAF strikes Horth 
Embassy Saigon 
message 2445 
VC attack US billet 
in Qui Nhon 
FIJI.MING DART II 
Embassy Saigon 
message 2495 
JCSM-IOO-65 
Embassy Saigon 
message 2536 
xi 
Sensitive 
DESCRIPTION 
The previously aborted VNAF strike 
is carried out against the Vu Con 
Barracks vlith US aircraft flying 
cover. 
Taylor cables hi s support of the 
McGeorge Bundy proposal but lays his 
str ess on the· sustained air campaign 
as a means of pressuring the DRV to 
"cease its intervention," r ather t han 
as a me~DS of strengthening the 
allied positi on in the South. 
In an act of defiance , t he VC bomb 
a US enlisted men ts billet in Qui 
Nhon, killing 23 Americans . 
Hit hin 24 hours of t he VC attack, 
the US r etali ates in an air attack 
on thE Chap Le and Chanh Hoa Army 
Barracks . 
The att ack is not linked 
specifically by the \'Jhite House to 
Qui Nhon but to a list of VC inci-
dents. 
Taylor outlines tough terms for any 
end to t he bombing. 
The DRV must 
cease its i ntervention, the VC end 
the insurgency, both return to the 
1954 and 1962 accords. 
Responding to a McNamara request and 
within his limitations, t he JCS 
recommend an 8-week air campaign 
against the Hort h confined mostly to 
panhandle t argets and with targets 
to be attacked in the order of ascen-
ding risk. 
General McConnell did not 
feel the proposal was adequate. 
To 
carry out the program, additional 
deployments are requested. 
Taylor further spells out his ttgradu_ 
ated repris ..... l tt concept, giving as its 
objectives in the order of their 
importance: (1) to affect the will of 
Hanoi; (2) to bolster GVN morale; and 
(3) to physically damage the DRV and 
thereby reduce its ability to support 
the VC. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. I 
~-----"-------'------
DATE 
13 Feb 1965 
17 Feb 1965 
18 Feb 1965 
19 Feb 1965 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCm-lENT 
B-52s sent to area 
ROLLum THUNDER 
approved by President; 
DEPTEL to Saigon 1718 
CINCPAC message 
170217 February to 
JCS 
UK reports Soviet 
interest in Geneva 
Talks 
President schedules 
ROLLnm THUNDER 
SNIE· 10-3/1-65 
Thao "semi-coup" 
Embassy Saigon 
message 2665 
xii 
DESCRIPl'ION 
Approval i s given for the dispatch 
· of 30 B-52s to Guam and 30 KC -135s 
to Okinawa for contL~gency'use in 
Vietnam. 
The President decides to inaugurate 
ROLLll;G Ttl~~ER sustained bombing 
of the North under strict limitations 
vrith programs approved on a week-by-
week basis. 
Admiral Sharp urges that t he strikes 
be conceived as "pressures!! not 
"reprisals" a.~d that any premature 
discussions or negotiations with the 
DRV be avoided. 
We must convince them 
that the cost of their aggression is 
prohibitive. 
The UK Ambassador, Lord Harlech, in-
forms Rusk that the Soviets have 
approached the UK about reactivating 
the 1954 Geneva Conference in the 
current Vietnam crisis. After an 
initial US interest, the Soviets back 
• 
off and the matter dies. 
President Johnson sets February 20 as 
the date for the beginning of ROLLING 
THUNDER and informs US Ambassadors in 
Asia. 
The intelligence community gives its 
view that sustained attacks on the 
DRV would probably cause it to seek 
a respite rather than to intensify 
the struggle in the South. 
Colonel Thao, a longtime conspirator, 
launches a "semi-coup" against Khanh, 
designed to remove him but not the 
Armed Forces Council. 
He is quickly 
defeated but the AFC decides to use 
the incident to remove Khanh itself. 
The events drag on for several days. 
Taylor recommends urgently that the 
ROLLING THlJNIJER strike be cancelled 
until the political situation in Sai-
gon has clarified. 
The President agrees. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
19 Feb 1965 
(Continued) 
21 Feb 1965 
24 Feb 1965 
27 Feb 1965 
28 Feb 1965 
2 Mar 1965 
3 Mar ·1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
CM-438-65 
Khanh resigns 
U.S. reassures 
Peking 
State Dept. issues 
"White Paper" on DRV 
aggression -
ROLLING THUNDER 
announced 
First ROLLING THUNDER 
strike 
President decides to 
send CSA, H.K. Johnson, 
to Vietnam 
• 
DESCRIPTION 
In a memo to McNamara, Wheeler 
proposes a systematic attack on the 
DRV rail system as t he most vulner-
able link in the transportation 
system . 
Military as opposed to 
psychological value of targets is 
already beginning to enter discus-
sions. 
Unable to rally support in the Armed 
Forces Council, Khanh resigns. 
In a meeting in Warsaw the Chinese 
are informed that while the U.S. 
will continue to take those actions 
required to defend itself and South 
Vietnam, i t has no aggressive in-
tentions toward the DRV. 
The State Department issues a "White 
Paper" detailing its charges of ag-
gression against North Vietnam. 
U.S. and GVN make simultaneous an-
·nouncement of decision to open a 
continuous limited air campaign 
against the North in order to bring 
about a negotiated settlement on 
favorable terms. 
·104 USAF planes attack Xom Bang annno 
depot and 19 VNAF aircraft hit the 
Quang Khe Naval Base in the first 
attacks of ROLLING THUNDER. 
The President decides to send Army 
Chief of Staff, Gen. H.K. Johnson, 
to Saigon to explore with Taylor and 
Westmoreland what additional efforts 
can be made to improve t he situation 
in t he South, complementarily to the 
strikes against t he North. 
Ti to letter to J olmson 
Yugoslav Pre sident Ti to, in a letter 
to Johnson, urges i mmediate negotia-
tion on Vietnam without conditions 
on either side. 
xiii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
5-12 Mar 1965 
6 Mar 1965 
8 Mar 1965 
9 Mar 1965 
10 Mar 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Gen. Johnson trip 
to Vi.etna.m 
Marines sent to 
DaNang 
Marines land at 
Da Nang 
Embassy Saigon msgs . 
2888, and 2889 
U Thant proposes big 
pOloler conference 
u.S. rejects Thant 
proposal 
Some bombing restric-
tions lifted 
CJCS memo to SecDef 
CM-469-65 
xiv 
DESCRIPTION 
Army Chief of Staff, Gen. H.K. 
Johnson, tours Vietnam on a mis -
sion for the President . 
TYro Marine Battalion Landing Teams 
are ordered to Da Nang by the Presi-
dent to ta.."k.e up base security func-
tions in the Da Nang perimeter. 
The hro Marine battalions land at 
Da Nang and set up defensive posi-
tions. 
Taylor expresses sharp annoyance at 
what seemsto him an unnecessarily 
timid and ambivalent U.S. stance on 
air strikes. 
The long delay between 
strikes, the marginal weight of the 
attacks, and the great ado about 
diplomatic feelers were ,veakening 
our signal to the North . 
He calls 
for a more dynamic schedule of 
st rike s, a multi ple "reek program re-
1entlessly marching North to break 
Hanoi's will. 
U Thant proposes a conference of the 
big powers with North and South 
Vietnam to start preliminary nego-
tiations. 
The U.S. rejects Thant's proposal 
until the DRV stops its aggression . 
The President lifts the restriction 
on the use of napalm in strikes on 
the North, and eliminates the re-
quirement for Vietnamese co-pilots 
in FARMGATE missions. 
In a memo to SecDef with preliminary 
reports on U.S. aircraft losses in 
hostile a-ction, ·Hheeler requests 
better ordnance, more recce, and 
greater field command flexibility in 
alternate target selection for 
weather problems. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
'TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
J2 Mar 1965 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
State msg . 1975 to 
Saigon 
President replies 
to Tito 
13 Mar 1965 
Embassy Saigon msg. 
2949 
13-18 Mar 1965 
Conference of non-
aligned nations in 
Belgrade 
14-15 Mar 1965 
ROLLING THUNDER VI 
14 Mar 1965 
Gen. Johnson submits 
his report to SecDef 
15 Mar 1965 
President approves 
most of Johnson 
report 
19 Mar 1965 
ROLLING THUNDER VII 
xv 
DESCRIPTION 
ROLLING THUNDER VI is authorize6. for 
the next day; it is subs2q,uently de-
layed until the 14th because of 
weather. 
In his repiy to Tito the President 
indicates the only bar to peace is 
DRV aggression vrhich must stop 
before talks can begin. 
Taylor complains about the postpone-
ment of RT VI, stating that too much 
attention is being paid to the speci-
fic target, any target ,vill do since 
the important thing is to keep up the 
momentum of the attacks . 
Tito calls a meeting of 15 non-
aligned nations in Belgrade. 
The 
declaration calls for negotiations 
and blames "foreign intervention" 
for the aggravation of the situation. 
The delayed RT VI is carried out and 
is the heaviest attacK thus far with 
over 100 U.S. aircraft and 24 'VNAF 
planes hitting two targets. 
Gen. Johnson submits a 21-recommenda-
tion report including a request that 
the scope and tempo of strikes against 
the North be increased and t hat many 
of the restrictions on t he strikes be 
lifted. 
Having reviewed the Johnson report, 
the President approves most of his 
recommendations including those for 
expanding and regularizing the cam-
paign against the North. 
The new 
guidelines apply to RT VII on 19 Mar. 
The first week's program of sustained 
bombing und2r the name ROLLING 
THUNDER VII begins. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
20 Mar 1965 
21 Mar 1965 
24 Mar 1965 
27 Mar 1965 
29 Mar 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
STEEL TIGER Begins 
CINCPAC msg. to JCS 
210525 Mar . 
McNaughton memo "Plan 
of Action for South 
Vietnam" 
JCSM- 221-95 
VC bomb US Embassy 
x vi 
DESCRIPI'IOJ'" 
Acting on a CINCPAC recomIT!endation the 
Administration had approved the separa-
tion of the anti - infiltration bombing 
in the Laotian panhandle from the 
BARRELL ROL"~ strikes in support of 
Laotian forces. 
The former are now 
called STEEL TIGER . 
In a long cable, CINCPAC proposes a 
program for cutting, in depth, the DRV . 
logistical network, especially below 
the 20th parallel. The plan calls for 
initial intensive strikes to cut the 
system and then regular armed recce to 
eliminate any residual capacity, or 
repair efforts. 
McNaughton concludes that the situation 
in SVN probably cannot be i mproved 
without extreme measures against the DRV 
and/or the intervention of US ground 
' 
forces. 
He gives a thorough treatment 
to the alternatives and 'risks with par-
ticular attention to the strong air 
campaign on the North . 
He takes note of 
the various escalation pOints and tries 
to assess the risks at each level. 
He 
evaluates the introduction of US troops 
and a negotiations alternative in the 
same manner . 
The JCS formally propose to SecDef a 
pl an already discussed withmm for an 
escalating 12-week air campaign against 
the North with a primarily milit ary-
physical destruction orientation . 
Interdiction is the objective rather 
than will-breaking . 
In a daring bomb attack on the US Em-
bassy, the VC kill many 'Americans and 
Vietn~mese and cause extensive damage. 
Taylor leaves almost simultaneously for 
talks in "v1 e.shington. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
31 Mar 1965 
1 Apr 1965 
2 Apr 1965 
5 Apr 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 303 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
CINCPAC msg . to JCS 
310407 If Jar • 
DESCRIPrION 
CINCPAC recow~ends a spectacular attack 
against the North to retaliate for the 
bombing of the Embassy. 
The President 
rejects the idea. 
NSC meeoGing wj.th 'l'aylor The Presiden .... , meets with Taylor and the 
NSC to begin' a major policy revie,.,r. 
McGeorge Bundy memo 
Bundy recommends little more than a con-
tinuation of the ongoing modest RT pro-
gram, gradually hitting the LOC choke 
pOints. 
He does, however, recommend re-
moving the restriction on the Marines to 
static defense. 
Focus is on winning in 
SVN. 
NSC meeting 
The White House policy review continued 
with another meeting of th~ principals. 
Rostow memo to SecState In a memo to Rusk, Walt Rostow proposes 
knocking out the DRV electric power grid 
as a means of bringing her whole urban 
industrial sector to a halt. 
NSC meeting 
McCone dissents from 
Presidential decision 
Canadian Prime Minister 
suggests pause 
JCSM-265-65 
xvii 
At the NSC meeting the President approves 
the Bundy recommendations including the 
proposal to allow US troops in Vietnam a 
combat role. 
CIA director McCone circulates a memo 
dissenting from the Presidential decision 
to have US troops take part in active 
combat. 
He feels that such action is not 
justified and wise unless the air attacks 
on the North are increased sufficiently to 
really be physically damaging to the DRV 
and to put real pressure on her. 
Canadian Prime ~linister Lester Pearson in 
a speech in Philadelphia suggests that the 
US call a halt to the bombing in the in-
terests of getting negotiations started. 
The JCS report confirmation of the con-
struction of a SAM missile site near Hanoi 
and request authority to strike it before 
it becomes operational. 
~~eir request is 
not acted on at the time. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
6 Apr 1965 
7 Apr 1965 
8 Apr 1965 
17 Apr 1965 
18 Apr 1965 
19 Apr 1965 
20 Apr 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR :OOCUMENT 
NSAM 328 
President ' s Johns 
Hopkins Speech 
Pham van Dong's "Four 
Points" 
Presidential press 
conference 
Rusk press conference 
Taylor opposes the 
ground build-up 
Hanoi rejects 17-
nation appeal 
Honolulu Conference 
xviii 
. DESCRIPTION 
The Presidential decisions of April 2 are 
promulgated using the verbatim language 
of the Bundy memo . 
In a major speech ~t Johns Hopkins Univ-
ersity, the President outlines his hope 
for a peaceful, negotiated settlement . 
in Vietnam. 
He names Eugene Black as the 
US negotiator and offers to assist both 
North and South Vietnam on a regional 
basis to the tune of $1 billion in the 
post-I-lar reconstruction and economic de -
velopment of SEA. 
Rejecting to the President's initiative, 
the DRV Foreign Minister, Pham van Dong 
announces his famous "Four Points" for 
the settlement of the war . 
Each side 
sees settlement in the caputulation of thE· 
other. 
Peking denounces the President ' s 
speech also. 
In a press conference the President ack-
nowledges the failure of his most recent 
peace overtures . 
Secretary Rusk rejects suggestions from 
Canada and others to suspend the bombing 
in order to get peace talks started. 
He 
reiterates the President ' s view that 
Hanoi does not I-lant peace . 
Having been bombarded with cables from 
Washington about a bUild-up in ground 
forces to carry out NSft~ 328, Taylor re-
acts opposing the idea in ~ cable t o 
McGeorge Bundy. 
Hanoi rejects the proposal of the 17 non-
aligned nations for a peace conference 
without pre-conditions by either side. 
Secretary McNamara meets with Taylor, 
Westmorelana) Sharp) Wm. Bundy, and 
McNaughton in Honolulu to review the im-
plementation and interpretation of NSAM. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
21 Apr 1965 
22 Apr 1965 
23 Apr 1965 
24 Apr 1965 
25 Apr 1965 
26 Apr 1965 
28 Apr 1965 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
SecDef memo to the 
President 
Intelligence assessment 
TS 
#185843-c 
Rusk Speech 
U Thant calls for pause 
McGeorge Bundy memo 
McNamara press briefing 
McCone resigns and 
submits last memo 
xix 
DESCRIPI'ION 
328. 
A plateau on air strikes) more ef-
fort in the South) and the specifics of 
force deployments are agreed to. 
Secretary Mc~amara reports the results of 
the Honolulu Conference to the President 
and indicates that harmony has been res -
tored among the vievlS of the various 
advisors. 
The intelligence community indicates that 
\~ithout either a massive increase in the 
air campaign or the introduction of US 
combat troops) the DRV would stick to its 
goal of military victory. 
In a speech before the American SOCiety 
of International Law) Rusk makes first 
public mention of interdiction and pun-
ishment as' the purposes of the US bombing 
rather than breaking Hanoi 's will. 
U Thant asks the US to suspend the bombing : 
for three months in an effort to get ne-
gotiations . 
The proposal is rejected in 
Washington. 
In an effort to clarify internal govern-
ment thinking about negotiations) Bundy 
outlines his view of US goals. 
His expo-
sition is a maxi mum US position whose 
acceptance would amount to surrender by 
the other side. 
In a special briefing for the press com-
plete with maps and charts) McNamara goes 
into considerable depth in explaining the 
interdiction purposes of the US strikes 
against the North . 
McCone who is leaving his post as CIA Dir-
ector (to be replaced by Admiral Raborn) 
submits a last memo to the President op-
posing the bUlld-up of ground forces in 
the absence of a greatly intensified cam-
paign against the North. 
TOP.SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
4 May 1965 
6 May 1965 
10 May 1965 
11 May 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
President denies DRV 
willingness to nego-
tiate 
Embassy Saigon msg. 
3632 
CIA Director Raborn 
assessment 
CM-600-65 
State Department msg . 
2553 
Embassy Saigon msg . 
3731 
State Department msg. 
2557 
xx 
• 
DESCRIPTION 
In a speech at the ~~ite House) the Presi-
dent indicates that the DRV has turned 
back all peace initiatives) either from 
the US or from neutral parties. 
Taylor confirms the President ' s vie\~ about 
the DRV by noting that in Hanoi ' s esti-
mates they a::ce still expecting to 
achieve a c~ear-cut victory and see no 
reason to negoti ate . · 
Commenting) at the President's request) 
on McCone ' s parting memo on Vietnam) Ra-
born agrees with the assessment that the 
bombing had thus far not hurt the North 
and that much more would be needed to 
force them to the negotiating table. He 
suggests a pause to test DRV intentions 
pnd gain support of world opinion before 
beginning the intensive air campaign that 
he believes '''ill be required . 
. The Chairman of the JCS recommends to the 
Secretary that the SAM. sites already iden-
tified be attacked . 
The President informs Taylor of his inten-
tion to call a temporary halt to the bomb-
ing and asks Taylor to get PM Quat ' s con-
currence. 
The purpose of the pause is t o 
gain flexibility either to negotiate if 
the DRV shows interest) or to intensify 
the air strikes if they do not. 
He does 
not intend to announce the pause but 
rather to communicate it privately to 
Moscow and Hanoi and await a reply. 
Taylor reports Quat's agreement but pre-
ference not to have the pause l inked to 
Buddha's birthday. 
State confirms the decision) agrees to 
avoid reference to the Buddhist holiday, 
and indicates that the pause will begin 
on May 13 and last for 5-7 days. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
12 May 1965 
13 May 1965 
14 May 1965 
15 May 1965 
16 May 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Department of State 
msg. 3101 
Embassy Moscow msg . 
3391 
Presidential speech 
Embassy Moscow msg . 
3425 
DESCRIPI'ION 
Kohler .in Moscow is instructed to contact 
the DRV Ambassador urgently and convey a 
message announcing the pause . 
SiD1Ul-
taneously, Rusk was transmitting the mes -
sage to the Soviet Ambassador in Washing-
ton. 
In MOSCQiv, the DRV Ambassador refuses to 
see Kohler or receive the message. 
A 
subsequent attempt to transmit the message 
through the Soviet Foreign Office also 
fails when the Soviets decline their 
assistance. 
The President avoids reference to the 
pause in a major public speech, but does 
calIon Hanoi to consider a "political 
solutionl1 of the' war. 
Kohler suggests that the language of the 
message be softened before ·i t is trans-
mitted to Hanoi via the British Consul in 
the DRV capital. 
British Consul-HanOi 
Having rejected Kohlerts suggestion, State 
transmits the pause msg . has the British Consul in Hanoi transmit 
the message . 
The DRV refuses to accept 
it. 
MA.CV msg. 16006 
Rusk-Gromyko meet in 
Vienna 
Embassy Saigon msg. 
3781 
xxi 
Westmoreland, with Taylor's concurrence, 
recomDlends the use of B-52s for patterned 
saturation bombing of VC headquarters and 
other area targets in South Vietnam. 
In a meeting between the two men in 
Vienna, Gromyko informs Rusk that the 
Soviet Union will give firm and full sup-
port to the DRV as a "fraternal socialist 
state." 
Taylor suggests that the DRVts cold re-
sponse to our initiative warrants a re-
sumption of the bombing. 
The level should 
be linked dil~ctly to the intensity of VC 
activity in the South during the pause. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
>17 May 1965 
18 May 1965 
20 May 1965 
21 May 1965 
2 Jun 1965 
3 Jun 1965 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
President decides to 
resume bombing 
Allies informed of im-
pending Lpcumption 
Bombing resumes 
Hanoi denounces the 
pause 
Hanoi ' s Paris demarche 
Rostow memo "Victory 
and Defeat in Guerilla 
Wars" 
Peking denounces 
the paus e 
SNIE 10- 6- 65 
ICC Commissioner 
Seaborn sees Pham Van 
Dong 
xxii 
DESCRIPI'Ir:. 
~p ~resident decides that Hanoi's re-
QPonse can be regarded as negative and 
orders the bombing to resume on May 18. 
US Asian and European allies are fore -
warned of the impending resumption of 
bombing . 
In a separate msg. the President 
authorizes the radar recce by B-52s of 
potential SE..l\. targets-. 
After five days of "pause" the bombing 
resumes in the North . 
On the evening of the resumption, the DRV 
Foreign Ministry issues a statement de-
scribing the pause as a "deceitful man-
euver" to pave the way for further US 
acts of war . 
Somewhat belatedly the DRV representati ve 
in Paris, IV1ai Van Bo discusses the "four 
points" with the Quai some"lo/'hat softening 
I 
their interpretation and indicating that 
they are not necessarily preliminary con-
ditions to negotiations . 
In a memo for the Secretary of State 
Rostow argues that a clear-cut US Victory 
in SVN i s possible. It re~uires mainly 
more pressure on the North Bnd effective 
conduct of the battle in the South . 
Declaring its support for the DRV, Pekipg ' 
denounces the President ' s bombing pause 
as a fraud. 
The intelligence cornmunity gives a pessi-
mistic analysis of the likelihood that 
Hanoi will seek a respite from the bo~b­
ing through negotiation. 
In a meeting in Hanoi with DRV Foreign 
Minister Pharo Van Dong ~ ICC Commissioner 
Seaborn (CanL3a) confirms Hanoi ' s rejec -
tion of current US peace initiatives . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
12 Jun 1965 
15 Jun 1965 
24 Jun 1965 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
SVN Premier Quat 
resigns 
3ecDef memo to JCS 
Ky assumes pover 
xxiii 
DESCRIPI'ION 
SVN Premier Quat hands his resignation 
to the Armed Forces COQDcil. 
McNamdra disapproves the JCS recomm~nda­
tion for air strikes against the SAM 
sites and IL 28s at DRV air bases since 
these might directly challenge the SOviet 
Union. 
Brig. Gen. Nguyen Cao Ky assumes power 
and decrees new measures to strengthen 
GVN prosecution of the war . 
r 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitjve 
A clillOiTOLOGY OF ROLLIim THl.JJ.'Ill)BR MISSIONS 
FEBRUA.BY - JUTE , 1965 * 
ROLLING THUNDER 1 was scheduled on 20 February 1965 as a one-day reprisal 
strike by U.S. and VNAf forces, against Quang Khe Naval Base and Vu Con 
Barracks. 
Two barracks and an airfield were authorized as weather alternates . 
ROLLING THUNDER I was cancelled because of a coup in Saigon and diplomatic 
moves between London and MoscO\{ . 
ROLLING THUNDER 2, 3, and 4 were planned as 
reprisal actions , but subsequently cancelled because of continued political 
instability in Saigon, during which VNAF forces were on "coup alert .!! 
Joint 
participation with VNAF was desired for political reasons . 
The first actual ROLLING THUNDER strike was ROLLING THUNDER 5, a one-day, no 
recycl e strike on 2 March 1965. 
Targets were one ammo depot and one naval 
base as primary U.S . and VNAF targets. 
Four barracks were authorized" as 
weather alternates. 
VNAF participation was mandatory. 
The approved effort 
for the week was substantially below the level recommended by the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff . 
ROLLING THUNDER 6 (14-15 March ) was a far more foreceful one-day fixed-
target program representing a week' s weight of attack. 
Napalm was authorized 
for t he first time, but aircraft recycle was prohibited . 
ROLLING THUNDER 7 (19-25 March ) relaxed the mandatory one -day strike 
execution to a week ' s period, with precise timing being left to field com-
manders . It included five primary targets with weather alternates. 
The re-
quirement for concurrent timing of U.S . and VNAF strikes was removed . 
One 
U.S. and two VNAF armed recce miSSions were authorized during the seven-day 
period. 
Specified route segments were selected in sou~hern North Vietnam 
authority was given to strike three fixed radar sites located one s: each 
route. 
The strikes were no longer to be specifically related to VC atroci-
ties and publicity on them was to be progressively reduced . 
ROLLING THUNDER 8 (26 March _ 1 April ) 
included nine radar sites for 
U.S. strike, and a barracks for VNAF . 
The radar targets reflected primarily 
policy-level interest in additional purely military targets in southern NVN. 
Three armed recce missions were again authorized, against specified route 
segments with U.S. armedrecce conducted against NVN patrol craft, along the 
coast from Tiger Island north to 200 and authority gr~nted to restrike opera-
tional radar sites. 
VNAF armed recce was conducted along Route 12 from Ha 
Tinh to two miles east of Mu Gia Pass . 
ROLLING THUNDER 9 (2-8 April) inaugurated a planned LOC interdiction 
campaign against l'JVN south of l atitude 200 • 
The Dong Phuong (JCS 
*Based on information in JCS compilations and ROLLING T~IDER 
execute messages. 
xxiv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
target ·No. 18.8) and Thanh Hoa bridges (JCS target No. 14) were the northern-
most fixed-target strikes in this campaign to be followed by additional armed 
reconnaissance strikes to sustain the interdiction. 
ROLLING THT.JIIJlJER 9 
(2-8 April) through ROLLING THUNDER 12 (23-29 April) completed the fixed-
target strikes against 26 bridges and seven ferries. 
ao 
ROLLING THUNDER 9 permitted three armed recce missions on specified 
route segments. 
Sorties were increased to not more than 24 armed recce 
stri~e sorties per 24-hour period in ROLLING THUNDER 10 through ROLLING 
THUNDER 12. 
This effort was still far short of the level considered by the 
JCS to be "req,uired for significant effectiveness." 
bo 
Prior to ROLLING THUNDER 10, armed recce targets were limited to 
locomotives, rolling stock, vehicles, and hostile NVN craft. For ROLLING 
THUNDER 10 through ROLLING THUNDER 12 the rules were changed to provide day 
and night armed recce misSions to obtain a high level of damage to military 
movement facilities, ferries, radar sites, secondary bridges., and rai.lroad 
rolling stock. It also included interdiction of the LOC by cratering, re-
striking and seeding choke-points as necessary. 
c. 
From the beginning, armed recce geographical coverage was limited 
to specified segmenis of designated routes. 
By ROLLING THUNDER 9 it had 
increased to one-time coverage of Routes 1 (D~~ to 19-58-36N), 7, 8, 15, 101, 
and lateral roads between these routes. 
d. 
The dropping of unexpended ordnance on Tiger Island was authorized 
in this period. 
Prior to this 'time, ordnance was jettisoned in ·the sea. 
ROLLING THUNDER 13 (30 April - May 1965) through ROLLING THUNDER 18 
(11-17 June) continued U.S. and VNAF strikes against 52 fixed military 
targets (five restrikes) as follows: 
six ammo depots, five supply· depots, 
21 barracks, two airfields, two POL storages, two radiO facilities, seven 
bridges, two naval bases, one railroad yard, two thermal power plants, one 
port facility, and one ferry. It was argued by the JCS that, as some bar-
racks and depots had been vacated, political .insistence on hitting only 
military targets south of latitude 200 was "constraining the program sub-
stantially short of optimum military effectiveness." 
a. 
During this six-week period armed recce sorties were expanded to 
a maximum allowable rate of 40 per day and a maximum of 200 per week (60 
additional armed recce sorties were authorized for ROLLING THUNDRR 17).< 
Although this period saw a significant increase in armed recce, the new 
'level was ,{ell below existing capabilities and, so the JCS argued, "the 
increase was authorized too late to achieve tactical surprise.!! 
b. With ROLLING THUNDER 13 armed recce authorizations changed from 
stated routes} etc.; to more broadly defined geographical areas, in this 
case the area south · of 200 • 
xxv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
c.Air strikes against fixed targets and armed recce were suspended 
over NVN during the five -day and twenty-hour bombing pause of 13-17 May. 
d. 
Authority was requested to strike the first SAM site durfng the 
ROLLING THUNDER 15 period (immediately following the bombing pause) but 
it was denied. 
e. 
Armed recce t~rgets were expanded during this six-week period to 
include railroad rolling stock) trucks) ferries) lighters) barges) radar 
sites) secondary bridges) road repair equipment) NVN naval craft) b ivouac 
and maintenance areas. 
Emphasis was placed on armed recce of routes 
emanating from Vinh in order to restrict traffic in and out of this important 
LOC hub. 
ROLLING THUNDER 18 added the provision that authorized day armed 
route recce sorties could include selected missions to conduct small precise 
attacks against prebriefed military targets not in the JCS target list) and 
thereafter conduct armed route recce with residual capability. 
f. 
ROLLING THUNDER 14 added authority for returning aircraft to use 
unexpended ordnance on Hon Nieu Island Radar Site) Hon Matt Island Radar 
Site) Dong Hoi Barracks) or rail and highway LOC ' s targets) in addition to 
Tiger I sland previously authori·zed for this purpose . 
·xxvi 
TOP SECBBT - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1. 
II. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
THE RCLI.IlIJG THUl'ID:c...-q ?ROGRAJvI BEGINS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS A.1'D OUTLTN~ 
INTRODUCTION--Pleiku Pull s The Trigger 
~{E LONG ROAD TO PLEIKU--A Retrospective View 
1 
2 
A. 
1964 : Year of Pol itical and Military Decline 
2 
B. 
Evolution of a New Policy 
2 
c. 
Signal s to Hanoi 
6 
D. 
Ominous Developments in Saigon 
8 
E. 
More Agonizing over Additional Pressures 
11 
III. 
DESOTO PATROL AS A REPRISAL OPPORTUNITY--AND THE 
DECISI ON TO SUSPEND 
16 
IV. 
FLA...1tiNG DART I At'!]) II - -T'rlE TIC?ERCEPTI BLE TRANSI 'I'ION 
23 
V. 
VI. 
A. 
The First Reprisal 
23 
B. 
Timing of Pleiku and the Kosygin Visit 
23 
C. 
The Reprisal Rational e and its Public Handling 
24 
D. 
An Act of Defiance 
27 
E. 
Reactions at Home and Abroad 
29 
"SUSTAH1ED REPRISAL!! MID I TS VARIANTS--ADVOCACY 
SHIFTS I NTO HIGH GEAR 
A. 
T'ne McGeorge Bundy Recommendation 
31 
31 
B.' The Taylor Conception of "Graduated Reprisals'l 
39 
C. , CINCPAC 's "Grac.uated Pressures" Philosophy 
43 
D. 
JCS Ei~1.t -'deek Pr ogram 
INITIATI ON OF "ROLLIJIJG THUIIDER" --18 DAYS OF lvlANEtTVER 
AND DELAY 
44 
48 
A. 
The Presidential Decision and 'I'aylor ' s Response 
48 
B. 
ROLLING THUiIDER I is La1.d On--and Ce.ncelled 
52 
C. 
The UK/USSR Co-Chairmen Gambit 
53 
a 
TOP SECFST - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
D. 
Efforts at Public Justification and Persuasion 
VII. 
ROLLING THUNDER BECO~!ES A CONTINUING PRQGRfu"'1 
A. 
McNamara ' s Concern Over Cost-Ineffectiveness 
of Strikes 
B. 
Taylor's Concern Over Feeble, Irresol ute Action 
C. 
President's Concern Over Insu£f i cient Pressure 
in South Vietnam 
D. 
Rolling Thunder VII--Enter "Regularity" and 
"Determination" 
VIn. TA..RGET RA.TIONALE SHIFTS TOWARD INTERDI CTION 
IX. 
REASSESSMENT AS OF APRIL 1 AN1) THE NSAlIl: 328 DECISIONS 
A. 
The Situation in South Vietnam 
B. 
I nternational Diplomatic Moves 
C. 
An End to "Reprisal" 
D. 
NSAH 328--Issues Posed and Decisions Made. 
.E. 
The Director of Central Intelligence Demurs 
X. 
APRIL 7th I NI TIATI VE--THE BILLION DOLLAR CARROT 
A. 
M01.ll1ting Public Criticism 
B. 
Ingredients for Johns Hopkins 
C. 
Hanoi and Peking "Close t he Door" 
D. 
President's Reprise: 
Tragedy, Disappointment--
But No Bombing Pause 
XI. 
. HONOLULU, APRIL 2Otn--IN SEARCH OF CONSENSUS 
A. 
Background and Concl usions of Conference 
B. 
I nterd:".ction is Surfaced 
C. 
Political Objecti ves are Reviewed 
59 
64 
64 
66 
69 
71 
74 
81 
81 
83 
84 
85 
90 
94 
94 
95 
96 
97 
99 
99 
101 
102 
b 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
" 
XII. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
PROJECT VAYFLO~B --rdE FI RST BOMBING PAUSE 
A. 
The Background 
B. 
Setting the Stage 
C. 
Transmit ting the Message 
D. 
Awaiting a Response 
E. 
Resuming the Bombing 
F. 
T'ne Aftermath 
106 
106 
110 
ll6 
122 
126 
128 
XIII . DEBATE OVER BOMBI NG STRATEGY AND EFFECTIVID.TESS 
CONTI NUES 
131 
A. 
The Rostow "Vict ory" Thesis 
131 
B. 
"ARC LIGHT" Comes t o South Vietnam--Attacks on 
the North Edge Upward 
133 
C. 
McNamara Reviews the Program 
135 
FOOTNOTES 
141 
~OP SECRET - Sensitive 
c 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVOLUTION OF THE WAR 
., 
'< 
THE ' ROLLING THTJIlID::!:R PROGRAM BEGINS 
I. 
INTRODUCTION--Pleiku Pulls the Trigger 
At 2:00 a.m. on the morning of February 7, 1965, at the end of five 
days of Tet celebrations and only hours after Kosygin had told a cheering 
crowd in Ha.noi that the Soviet Union would "not remain indifferent" if 
"acts of war" "\-rere committed against North Vietnam, Viet Cong guerrillas 
carried out well-coordinated raids upon aU.S. advisers' barracks in Pleiku 
and upon a U.S. helicopter base at Camp Holloway, some four miles away. 
Of the 137 American soldiers hit in the two attacks, nine eventually died 
and 76 had to be evacuated; the losses in equipment were also severe: 
16 
helicopters damaged or destroyed and six fixed-wing aircraft damaged, making . 
this the heaviest communist assault up to that time against American installa-
tions in South Vietnam. 
The first flash from Saigon about the assault came on the ticker at 
the National Military Command Center at the Pentagon at 2:38 p.m. Saturday, 
February 6, Washington time. It triggered a swift, though long-contemplated 
Presidential decision to give an "appropriate and fitting" response. 
Within 
less than 14 hours, by 4:00 p.m. Sunday, Vietnam time, 49 U.S. Navy jets --
A-4 Skyhawks and F-8 Crusaders from the Seventh Fleet carriers USS Coral Sea 
and USS Hancock -- had penetrated a heavy layer of monsoon clouds to deliver 
their bombs and rockets upon North Vietnamese barracks and staging areas at 
Dong Hoi, a guerrilla training garrison 40 mil es north of the 17th parallel. 
On the following afternoon, a flight of 24 VNAF A-lH Skyraiders; cancelled 
the previous day because of poor weather, followed up the attack by striking 
a military communications center in the Vinh Linh area just north of the 
border. 
Though conceived and executed as a limited one-shot tit-for-tat reprisal, 
the dramatic U.S. action, long on the military planners' drawing boards 
under the operational code name FLAMING DART, precipitated a rapidly moving 
sequence of events that transformed the character of the Vietnam war and the 
U.S. role in it. It was also the opening move in what soon developed into 
an entirely nei-r phase of that ,-rar : 
the sustained U. S. bombing effort against 
North Vietnam. It is the purpose of this paper to reconstruct the immediate 
circumstances that led up to the FlAMING DART decision, to retrace the changes 
in rationale that progressively transformed the reprisal concept into a sus-
tained gr5.duatec bombing effort, and to chron~.cle the relationship beh-reen 
that effort and the military-political moves to shore up Saigon and the 
military-diplomatic signals to dissuade Hanoi, during the crucial early 
months of February tl1..rough May of 1965. 
1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
II. 
THE LONG ROAD TO PLEIKU--A Retrospective View 
A. 
1964: 
Year of Political and Military Decline 
The yeaT 1964 was marked by a graduaJ American awakening to the 
fact that the Viet Cong were vrill-l1ing the war in South Vietnam. 
Almost 
uninterrupted political upheaval in Saigon was spawning progressive mili-
tary dissolution in the countryside. 
Constant changes within the Vietnamese 
lea'dership were bringing GVN civil administration into a state of disarray 
and GVN military activities to a near-standstill. 
ARVN forces were becorrang 
more and more defensive and demoralized . 
At the same time, the communists 
were visibly strengthening their support base in Laos, stepping up the rate 
of infiltration of men and supplies into South Vietnam, and mounting larger 
and more aggressive attacks. 
The GVN was still predominant, though not 
unchallenged , in the urban population centers; there were also a few areas 
where traditional local power structures (the Hoa Hao, the Cao Dai, etc.) 
continued to exercise effective authority. 
But the rest of the country 
was slipping, largely by default, under VC control. 
By the end of 1964, 
all evidence pointed to a situation in which a final collapse of the GVN 
appeared probable and a victorious consolidation of VC power a distinct 
possibility. 
Ironically, it was left to Senator Fulbright to state the harsh 
realities in terms which set the tone for much of Administration thinking 
as it was to emerge in the months to come -- though his views then were 
hardly consistent with the opposition role he was increasingly to take later 
on. 
As early as March 1964, in a celebrated speech entitled "Old Myths and 
New Realities" he observed that "the hard fact of the matter is that our 
bargaining position is at present a weak one; and until the equation of 
advantage between the two sides has been substantially altered in our favor, 
there can be little prospect of a negotiated settlement." 
B. 
Evolution of a New Policy 
With the gro"Ting realization that the ally on whose behalf the 
United States had steadily deepened its commitment in Southeast Asia was 
in a near state of dissolution, Washington launched a protracted reassess-
ment of the fUture American role in the war and began a determined search 
for new pressures to be mounted against the cOrmnunist enemy, both within and 
outside of South Vietnam. 
High level deliberations on alternative U.S. 
courses of action in Southeast Asia were started as early as March 1964, 
and a military planning process was set in motion in which much attention 
was given to the possibility of implementing some sort of pressures or 
reprisal Tolicy ~gainst North Vietnam. 
The first of these planning efforts, authorized by the President 
on 17 March 1964 (NSAH 288), led to the development of CINCPAC OPIAN 37-64, 
a three-phase plan covering operations against VC infiltration routes in 
Laos and Cambodia and against targets in North Vietnam . 
Phase I provided 
for air and ground strikes against selected targets in laos, together with 
2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
hot pursuit actions into Laotian ~Dd Cambodian border areas. 
Phase II 
provided for trtit-for-tat" air strikes, airborne/amphibious raids, and 
aerial mining operations against targets in North Vietnam. 
Phase III pro-
vided for increapingly severe air strikes and other actions against North 
Vietnam, going beyond the trtit-for-tat tr concept. 
According to the plan, 
air strikes would be conducted primarily by GVN forces, assisted by U.S. 
aircraft. 
As part of OPLAN 37-64, a detailed list of specific targets for 
air attack in North Vietnam ,vas dra"m up, selected on the basis of three 
criteria: 
(a) reducing North Vietnamese support of communist operations 
in Laos and South Vietnam, (b) li~miting North Vietnamese capabilities to 
take direct action against Laos and South Vietnam, and finally (c) impairing 
North Vietnam's capacity to continue as an industrially viable state. 
Detailed characteristics were provided for each target, together with damage 
effects that could be achieved by various scales of attack against them. 
This target list, informally called the "94 Target List," became the basic 
reference for much of the subsequent planning for air strikes against North 
Vietnam, when target selection was involved. ~ 
The Tonkin Gulf incident of 4-5 August, which precipitated the 
first U.S. reprisal action against North Vietnam, had enabled the Adminis-
tration to obtain a broad Congressional Resolution of support and had brought 
with it a prompt and substantial forward deployment of U.S. military forces 
in Southeast Asia, to deter or deal with possible cOID~unist reactions to 
the U.S. reprisal strike. 
Encouraged somewhat by the fact that no such 
reaction occurred, U.S. officials began to look more hopefully toward force-
ful military alternatives that might help salvage the deteriorating situation 
in South Vietnam. 
A new wave of disorders and governmental eruptions in 
Saigon gave added impetus to a succession of JCS proposals for intensified 
harassing and other punitive operations against North Vietnam. 
Their recom-
mendations included retaliatory actions for stepped up VC incidents, should 
they occur, and initiation of conti,nuing air strikes by GVN and U. S. forces 
against North Vietnamese targets. ~ 
A Presidential decision was issued on 10 September.* Besides some 
modest additional pressures in the Lao panhandle and covert actions against 
North Vietnam, it authorized only preparations for retaliatory actions 
against North Vietnam in the event of any attack on U.S. units or anyextra-
ordinary North Vietnamese/VC action against South Vietnam. 
The forward 
deployments that had been carried out in connection ,d th the Tonkin incident 
and in accordance with OPLAN 37-64 were kept in place, but the forces 
involved were pr8cluded from action in South Vietnam and no decision was 
made to utilize them in operations in Laos or North Vietnam. 
Throughout September and October~ the JCS continued to urge 
stronger U.S. ' action not only in North Vietnam, but also 'in Laos, where 
infiltration ,vas clearly on the increase, and in South Vietnam, where 
GVN survival ,'las becoming precarious and time seemed to be rurming out. 
* Hational Secur~,ty Action i.',~emo!'aDdmn No . 314, 10 September 1964 (TS) 
3 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
These urgings reached a crescendo on 1 November 1964 "Then, just 
three days prior to the U.S. Presidential elections, the VC executed a 
daring and dr~matic mortar attack on the U.S. air base at Bien Boa, killing 
five Americans, "rounding 76, and damaging or destroying 27 of the 30 B-57' s 
that had been deployed to South Vietnam to serve notice upon Hanoi that 
the United States had.readily at hand the capacity to deliver a crushing 
air attack on the North. 
The attack was the most spectacular anti-American 
incident to date and was viewed by the JCS as warranting a severe punitive 
response. 
Their reco~mendat ion, accordingly, went far beyond a mere 
reprisal action. It called for an initial 24-36 hour period of air strikes 
in Laos and low-level air reconnaissance south of the 19th parallel in North 
Vietnam, designed to provide a cover for the introduction of U.S. security 
forces to protect key U.S. installations, and for the evacuation of U.S. 
dependents from Saigon. 
This would be followed, in the next three days, 
by a B-52 strike against Phuc Yen, the principal airfield near Hanoi, and 
by strikes against other airfields and major POL facilities in the Hanoi/ 
Haiphong area; and subsequently by armed reconnaissance against infiltration 
routes in Laos, air strikes against infiltration routes and targets in North 
Vietnam, and progressive PAC OM. and SAC strikes against remaining military 
and industrial targets in the 94 Target List. JI 
That the JCS recommendations ,vere not accepted is hardly sur-
prlslng, considering the magnitude and radical nature of the proposed 
actions and the fact that these actions 'vould have had to be initiated on 
the eve of the election by a ~resi dent who in his campaign had plainly 
made manifest his disinclination to lead the United States into a wider 
war in Vietn~m, repeatedly employing the slogan ""re are not going North." 
In any event, as subsequent developments indicate, the President was not 
ready to approve a program of air strikes against North Vietnam, at least 
until the available alternatives could be carefully and thoroughly re-
ex~mined. 
Such a re-examination "Tas initiated immediately following the 
election, under the aegis of a NSC interagency working group chaired by 
Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy. 
After a month of intensive 
study of various options, ranging from an intensification of existing 
programs to the initiation of large-scale hostilities against North Vietnam, 
the working group recowmended a graduated program of controlled military 
pressures designed to signal U.S. determination, to boost morale in the 
South and to increase the costs and strains upon the North. 
A basic aim 
of the program was to build a stronger bargaining position, to restore an 
"eqUilibrium" in the balance of forces, looking toward a negotiated settle-
ment. 
The recommended program "ras in two phases: 
Phase I, 'vhich was to 
last about 30 days, consisted of little more than an intensification of 
earlier "signals" to Hanoi that it should cease supporting the insurgency 
in the South or face progressively higher costs and.penalties. 
Thus the 
program upped several of the military pressures already being applied, and 
added armed aerial re connaissance missions against infiltration routes and 
facilities i~ Laos; it also provided for' possible individual reprisals for 
4 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
future VC provocations similar to the attack on Bien Hoa. 
Coupled with 
these military measures was to be a continuous declaratory policy com-
municating our willingness to negotiate on the basis of the Geneva accords. 
It Ivas recommended that successive actions "rou'_d be undertaken only after 
waiting to discern Hanoi's reactions to previous actions, with the commit-
ment to later stages, €uch as initiation of air strikes against infiltration 
targets across the 17th parallel, kept unspecific and dependent upon enemy 
reactions. 
The recommended program also included a Phase II, a continuous 
program of progressively more serious air strikes possibly running from 
two to six months. 
The attacks would at first be limited to infiltration 
targets south of the 19th parallel, but would gradually work northward, 
and could eventually encompass all major military-related targets, aerial 
mining of ports, and a naval blockade, with the weight and tempo of the 
action being adjusted to the situation as it developed. 
The approach would 
be steady and deliberate, "progressively mounting in scope and intensity," 
with the U.S. retaining the option to proceed or not, escalate or not, or 
q,uicken the pace or not, at any time. It "ras agreed, however, that this 
second phase would not be considered for i mplementation until after the GVN 
had demons~rated considerable stability and effectiveness. 
As part of this "progressive sq,ueeze," the working group recom-
mended that the U.S. be willing to pause to explore negotiated solutions, 
should North Vietnam sho,v any signs of yielding, "rhile maintaining a credible 
threat of still further pressures . 
In the vie'w of the working group, the 
prospect of greater pressures to come was at least as important as any damage 
actually inflicted, since the real target was the will of the North Viet-
namesegovernment to continue the aggression in the South rather than its 
capability to do so. 
Even if it retained the capability, North Vietnam 
might' elect to discontinue the aggression if it anticipated future costs 
and risks greater than it had bargained for. ~ 
The JCS dissented from the working group's program on the grounds 
that it did not clearly provide for the kinds and forms of military pressures 
that might achieve U.S. objectives. 
They recommended instead a more accel-
erated program of intensive air strikes from the outset, along lines similar 
to the actions they had urged in response to the Bien Hoa incident. 
Their 
program was in consonance with the consistent JCS vie,·r that the way to exert 
significant military pressure on North Vietnam vTaS to bring to bear the 
maximum practicable conventional military power in a short time. 21 
T'ne wor':ing group's proposals for a g -,~aduated approach were h9.Ill.-
mered out in a series of policy conferences ,'lith Ambas sador Taylor, "rho 
had returned to Washington for this purpose at the end of November, and 
were then presented to the Y£esident, who approved them conditionally on 
1 December, 'loTi thout, hmvever, setting a timetable or specifying precise 
implementing actions. Allies had to be brought in line, and certain other 
5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
diplomatic preliminaries had to be arranged, before the program could . 
be launched . 
More important, it vIas feared that possible enemy reactions 
to the program might subject the GVN to severe counter-pressures which, 
in its then enfeE'bled state, might be more than it could bear. 
Thus 
securing some GVN leadership commitment to improved performance was made 
a prere~uisite to mounting the more intensive actions contemplated. 
In 
fact, Ambassador Taylor returned to Saigon with instructions to hold out 
the prospect of these more intensive actions as an incentive to the GVN 
to "pull itself together" and, indeed, as a ~uid pro ~uo, for achieving, 
in some manner, greater stability and effecti veness . 
The instructions, 
however, contained no reference to U.S. intentions wi th respect to negoti-
ations. 
Any mention of U.S , interest in a negotiated settlement before 
the initiation of military operations against North Vietnam was regarded 
as likely to have the opposite effect from the desired bolstering of GVN 
morale and stamina, as well as being premature in terms of the hoped-for 
i mprovement in the U,S. bargaining position vis-a-vis Hanoi that might 
result from the actions . 
The President 's 1 December decisions were extremely closely held 
during the ensuing months . 
The draft NlliU1 that had been prepared by the 
working group was never issued and the decisions were only informally 
communicated. 
Ambassador Taylor, upon returning to Saigon, began his dis-
cussions of the proposed actions ,'lith the GVN, and received certain assurances . 
Several allies, including the UK, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, were 
given a fairly complete description of U.S . intentions. 
Others, such as 
Thailand and Laos, were informed about Phase I only. Still others, like 
Nationalist China, Korea, and the Philippines, were simply given a vague 
outline of the projected course of action. §/ 
The first intensified military pressures in the progrrun--more high 
level reconnaissance missions over North Vietnam, more extensive 34A mari-
time operations with VNAF cover south of the 18th parallel, and RLAF air 
strikes against PL/NVA forces in Laos--were begun on 14 December, along 
with a new program of limited USAF-Navy armed reconnaissance missions against 
infiltration routes and facilities in Northern Laos under the code name 
BA~REL ROLL. 
The strikes were not publicized and were not expected to have 
a significant military interdiction effect . 
They were considered useful 
primarily for their political value as another of a long series of signals 
to Hanoi to the effect that the U,S. was prepared to use much greater force 
to frustrate a communist take-over in South Vietnam. 
C. 
Signals ~o Hanoi 
Throughout 1964, a basic U.S. policy in Vietnam was to severely 
restrain any expansion of' the direct U.S, combat involvement, but to carry 
out an essentially psychological campaign to convince Hanoi that the United 
States meant business. 
The campaign included repeated reaffirmations of 
the U.S. cOID~tment to the defense of Southeast Asia, made both in public 
and in diplomatic channels; hints and l-rarnings that the U. S. might ex-pand 
6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the war with countermeasures against North Vietnam, such as guerrilla 
raids, air attacks, naval blockade, or even land invasion, if the aggres-
sion persisted; and a number of overt military actions of a precautionary 
nature, intended more to demonstrate U.S. resolve than to affect the mili-
tary situation. 
Taken together, however, the signals were somewhat 
ambiguous. 
Among the more important military-political actions, carried out 
with considerable publicity, were the accelerated military construction 
effort in Thailand and South Vietnam, the prepositioning of contingency 
stockpiles in Thailand and the Philippines, the forward deployment of a 
carrier task force and land-based tactical aircraft within close striking 
distance of relevant enemy targets, and the assignment of an unprecedentedly 
high-level "first team" to man the U.S. Diplomatic Mission in Saigon. 
These 
measures were intended both to convince Hanoi and to reassure the GVN of 
the seriousness and durability .of the U.S. commitment. 
In addition, the U.S. undertook a number of unpublicized and more 
provocative actions, primarily as low-key indications to the enemy of the 
U.S. willingness and capability to employ increased force if necessary. 
Chief among these were the occasional DE SOTO Patrols (U.S . destroyer patrols 
conducted deep into the Gulf of Tonkin along the coast of North Vietnam), 
both as a "show of strength!! and as an intelligence gathering device; 
Laotian air strikes and limited GVN cross-border operations against VC 
infiltration routes in Laos;GVN maritime raids and other harassing actions 
against North Vietnam; YANKEE TEAM, low-level photo reconnaissance missions 
over Laos, conducted by U.S. jet aircraft with fighter escorts for suppres-
sive or retaliatory action against enemy ground fire; and finally, the 
initiation at the very end of 1964 of BARREL ROLL, anned reconnaissance 
missions by U.S. jet fighters against VC infiltration routes and facilities 
in Laos. 
The fact that these actions were not publicized--although most of 
them eventually became public knO'ldedge--stemmed in part from a desire to 
communicate an implicit threat of !!more to come" for Hanoi's benefit, with-
out arousing undue anxieties domestically in the United States in a Presi-
dential election year in which escalation of the war became a significant 
campaign issue. 11 
Within this general pattern of subtle and nQt-so-subtle warning 
signals, the U. S. reprisal strike, follovring the controversial Gulf of 
Topkin incident of 4-5 August, stands out as a single forceful U. S. reaction, 
the portent of which could hardly have escaped Hanoi . Its effect, however, 
may have been gradually diluted, first by the care that was taken to allay 
public fears that it represented anything more than an isolated event , and 
subsequently by the failure of the U.S. to react to the November 1 attack 
at Bien Hoa or to the Christmas 1ve bombing of the Brink BOQ . ~ Even 
this signal, therefore, may not have been, in Hanoi's reading, entirely 
unambiguous . 
7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
For Hanoi, the U.S. public declaratory policy during most of 
1964 must have been a major source of confusion. 
Presidential statements 
alternated between hawk-like cries and dove-like coos. 
Thus, in February 
1964, in a University of California speech, thp. President issued the 
thinly veiled threat that !!those engaged in external direction and supply 
would. do well to be reminded and to remember that this type of aggression 
is a deeply dangerous game." 
But for the rest of the year and particularly 
during the election campaign, the President was saying, emphatically and 
repeatedly, that he did not intend to lead the United States into a wider 
war in Vietnam. 
He ridiculed the pugnacious chauvinism of Barry Goldwater 
and contrasted it with his own restraint. 
!!There are those that say I 
ought to go north and drop bombs, to try to wipe out the supply lines, and 
they think that would escalate the war,!! he said in a speech on September 25· 
!!But we don't want to get involved in a nation with seven hundred million 
people and get tied down in a land war in Asia.!! 
But if there was reason for confusion in Hanoi's reading of the 
public declaratory signals, there was no shortage of opportunities for 
transmitting more une~uivocal signals through ~uiet diplomatic channels. 
The clearest explanations of U.S. policy, and warnings of U.S. intent, 
were commQDicated to Hanoi on June 18, 1964, by the Canadian International 
Control Commissioner Seaborn. 
In a long meeting with Premier PhamVan Dong, 
Seaborn presented a carefully prepared statement of U.S. views and intentions 
to the North Vietnamese Premier, clearly warning him of the destructive con-
se~uences for the DRV of a continuation of its present course. 
Pharo Van 
Dong fully understood the seriousness and import of the warning conveyed 
by Seaborn. 
But in this, as in a subse~uent meeting with Seaborn on August 15, 
Pham Van Dong showed himself utterly unintimidated and calmly resolved to 
pursue the course upon which the DRV was embarked to what he confidently 
expected would be its successful conclusion. 
On balance, while U.S. words and actions were not always in con-
sonance, while public and private declarations were much in conflict, and 
while U.S. reactions fluctuated between the unexpectedly forceful and the 
mystifyingly hesitant, the action-signals were sufficiently numerous and 
the warnings sufficiently explicit to have given Hanoi a fair awareness that 
the U.S. was likely to respond to the deteriorating situation by intensifying 
the conflict. 
How far this intensification would go, neither Hanoi nor the 
U.S. could have foreseen. 
D. 
Ominous Developments in Saigon 
The first of the new military pressures against the North--
BARREL ROLL air strikes in Laos--authorized in the 1 December decision, 
went into effect on 14 December. 
The hoped-for i mprovement in GVN stability, 
hO'i{ever, did not materialize. 
To the contrary, on 20 December the erratic 
SVN Premier Lt. Gen. Nguyen Khanh abruptly dissolved the High National 
Council "Thich the U. S. Mission had been supporting as a device for encour-
aging a transition from military to civilian rule. 
As a re sult, U.S.-GVN 
relations were placed under extreme strain including, among other things, 
• 
an open personal rii't between General Khanh and Ambassador Taylor. 
8 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The crisis of confidence that developed was one reason for the 
lack of a U.S. response to the bombing of the Brink BOQ in Saigon· on 
Christmas E-.,re . 
As pointed out earlier, it was the kind of incident '<lhich 
had been contemplated in the approved Phase I guidelines as warranting a 
U.S. reprisal action, and the JCS did recommend such an action. 
They pro-
posed an immediate air strike against Vit Thu Lu army barracks just north 
of the 17th parallel, employing up to 40 aircraft sorties, with Vietnamese 
participation if feasible. It was to be a one-day strike, on a much smaller 
scale than those recommended by the JCS on earlie'r occasions. 2/ 
However, 
both because of the unsettled situation in Vietnam and because of the 
Christmas Season--which caught the President and the Secretary of Defense 
out of town and Congress in recess--Washington was hesitant and reluctant 
to press for a prompt reaction. 
By the time the issue was discussed with 
the President on 29 December, it seemed too late for an event-associated 
reprisal and the decision was negative. 
In the meantime, GVN forces had experienced major reverses. 
ARVN 
as well as the Regional and Popular Forces had been seriously weakened by 
defeat and desertions in the last few months of 1964 . 
A highly visible 
setback occurred from 26 December to 2 January 1965 at Binh Gia, where the 
VC virtually destroyed two Vietnamese Marine battalions. 
Viet Cong strength, 
augmented by infiltrating combat forces from North Vietnam, increased, and 
their hit-and-run tactics were increasingly successful. 
The government of Tran Van Huong came to an abrupt end on 27 Janu-
ary 1965 when the Vietnamese Armed Forces Council ousted him, leaving only a 
facad~ of civilian government. 
The continuing pm<ler struggle clearly 
impeded military operations. 
Large elements of VNAF, for example, were 
maintained on constant "coup alert." }!2/ 
Washington reacted to these developments with considerable anguish. 
"I think we must accept that Saigon morale in all quarters is nm<l very shaky 
indeed .... " wrote Assistant Secretary of State William P. Bundy on Janu-
ary 6, and he continued: 
We have not yet been able to assess the overall impact of 
the continuing political crisis and of the Binh Gia military 
defeat, but there are already ample indications that they have 
had a sharp discouraging effect just in the last two weeks. 
By 
, the same token, it is apparent that Hanoi is extremely confident, 
and that the Soviets are being some\vhat tougher and the' Chinese 
Communists are consolidating their ties I'Ti th Hanoi ... they see 
Vietnam falling into their laps in the fairly near future .... The 
sum total of the above seems to us to point ... to a prognosis that 
the situation in Vietnam is now likeJy to come apart more rapidly 
than we had anticipated 'in November. 
~ 
A similarly gloomy view was taken by Assistant Secretary of pefense, 
John McNaughton . 
In a February 1965 memorandum (no exact date), ~ he 
characterized the situation as "deterior.ating": 
9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"Bien Hoas" cannot be prevented; the new goverrunent will 
probably be tUlstable and ineffectual, and the VC will probably 
continue to extend their hold over the population and territory. 
It can be expected that soon (6 months? two years?) (a) govern-
ment officiels at all levels will adjust their behavior to an 
eventual VC take-over, (b) defecti'ons of significant military 
forces will take place, (c) whole integrated regions of the 
country will be totally denied to the GVN, (d) neutral and/or 
left-wing elements will enter the goverrunent, (e) a popular-
front regime will emerge 'which ,vill invite the US out, and 
(f) fundamental concessions to the VC and accommodations to 
the DRV will put South Vietnam behind the Curtain. 
These vie,vs were fully consistent with USIB-approved national intel-
ligence estimates which, as early as October 1964, predicted: 
... a further decay of GVN will and effectiveness. 
The 
likely pattern of this decay Hill be increasing defeatism, 
paralysis of leadership, friction with Americans, exploration 
of possible lines of political accommodation ,vi th the other 
side, and a general petering out of the war effort .... 111 
By February 1965, the :intelligence o:nnmuni ty saw "the present poli t-
ical arrangements in Saigon [ail avowedly temporary" and detected no more 
than "a. faint chance that the scenario announced for the ensuing weeks 
fjiouliJ hold promise for improved political ~tability in SVN." 
It judged 
the odds as "considerably less than even ... LthaY the spring and summer 
might see the evolution of a stronger base for prosecuting the counter-
insurgency effort than has heretofore existed." W 
These vielvs were most authoritatively endorsed by the President's 
highest ri~tional security staff advisor, McGeorge Bundy, who undertook 
an urgent fact-finding trip to South Vietnam at the beginning of February. 
In a pivotal memorandum to the President W 
(vlhich will be referred to 
in greater detail subsequently) he characterized the general situation as 
follovlS : 
For the l ast year--and perhaps for longer--the overall 
situation in Vietnam has been deteriorating. 
The Communists 
have been gaining and the anti-Communist forces have been losing. 
As a result there is now great uncertainty among Vietnamese as 
well as Americans as to whether Communist victory Ca..l1 be, prevented. 
There is nervousness about the determination of the U.S. Govern-
ment. 
There'is recrimination and fear a~ong Vietnamese political 
leaders . 
There is an appearance of weariness. among some military 
leaders . 
There is a worrisome lassitude among the Vietnamese 
generally. 
There is a distressing absence of positive commit-
ment to any serious social or political purpose. 
Outside 
observers are ready to write the patient off. All of this tends 
to bring latent anti-Americanism dangerously near to the surface. 
10 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
To be an American in Saigon today is to have a gnawing 
feeling that time is against us. 
Junior officers in all 
services are able, zealous and effective within the limits of 
their means. 
Their morale is sustained by the fact that they 
~~ow that they are doing their jobs well and that they will 
not have to accept the responsibility for defeat. 
But near 
the top, "There responsibility is heavy and accountability real, 
one can sense the inner doubts of men >vhose outward behavior 
remains. determined. 
Interestingly, McGeorge Bundy saw the military situation as moder-
ately encouraging and the Vietnamese people still remarkably tough and 
resilient, though the social and political fabric was stretched thin. 
"Nevertheless ," he warned, " ... extremely unpleasant surprises are 
increasingly possible--both political and military." 
E. 
More Agonizing over Additional Pressures 
In the face of these uniformly discouraging appraisals, both 
Saigon and Washington continued their long debate over ways and means of 
mounting ne"T or more intensive pressures against the enemy--and most 
notably over the desirability and likely effectiveness of reprisal strikes 
and "Phase II operations" against the DRV. 
But enthusiasm for these 
operations was far from boundless. 
The intelligence community, for example, had expressed, ever . 
since May of 1964, very little confidence that such added pressures would 
have much i mpact on ~anoi's course. 
The 9 October 1964 national estimate 
considered probable communist reactions to "a systematic program of gradu-
ally intensif'ying US/GVN [aiij attacks against targets in the DRV .... " 
The estimate tended only very hesitantly to the judgment that such a program 
of air attacks, if protracted, might "on balance" cause the DRV to stop its 
military attacks in SVN, to press for a negotiated cease-fire in the South, 
and to try to promote an international conference to pursue their ends, 
expecting, hmvever, to fight another day. 
State dissented from even this 
ambivalent judgment, believing that the DRV would carryon the fight regard-
less of air attacks. ~ 
. In February 1965, they reiterated this hesitant view, again with 
State dissenting: 
If the United States vigorously continued in its attacks 
and damaged some important economic or military assets, the 
DRV ... might decide to intensif'y the struggle, but ... it seems 
to us somewhat more likely that they would decide to make some 
effort to secure a respite from US attack.... nJ 
11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Parenthetically, even this equivocal judgment was reversed in 
effect, though not explicitly, in a June, 1965 estimate, this time with 
USAF ACS/I dissenting: 
Our present estimate is that the odds are against the 
postulated US attacks leading the DRV to make conciliatory 
gestures to secure a respite from the bombing; rather, we 
believe that the DRV would persevere in supporting the insur-
gency in the South. ~ 
On top of these by no means reassuring estimates, Ambassador Taylor's 
hopes for a more stable GVN had been badly shaken by his abrasive experi-
ences with General Khanh during the late-December episode. 
The Ambassador-
Premier relationship was now ruptured beyond repair, and highest-level 
contacts between the USG and the GVN had to be carried on through Deputy 
Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson. 
For the first time Maxwell Taylor talked 
seriously of possible U.S. disengagement, and even suggested a new role 
for air attacks on the North in such a context. 
In a year-end joint Taylor-Johnson cable to the Secretary of 
State, 12/ 
the Mission leadership actually suggested, as one possible 
alternative, "disengaging from the present intimacy of relationship TtTith 
the GVN, withdrawing the bulk of our advisers ... while continuing sufficient 
economic and MAP aid to keep the GVN going." 
In such a situation, they 
would shrink MACV to the status of a MAAG and USOM to that of an economic-
budgetary advisory group, but continue to accept responsibility for air 
and maritime defense of South Vietnam against the DRV. 
The danger in such 
a course, hoTtTever, TtTould be that "panicked by ,vhat ,.lQuld be interpreted as 
abandonment , the fovil leaders here TtTould rush to compete with each other 
in making deals with the NLF." 
Taylor and Johnson, however, believed that 
this danger could be offset by an energetic U.S. program of reprisal attacks 
and Phase II operations against the DRV. 
Thus, in ·the Taylor/Johnson view, there ,'Tere nm,r three conditions 
in which reprisal attacks and Phase II operations might be condu~ted: 
(i) In association with the GVN after the latter had proven 
a reasonably stable government "able to control its armed forces" -- the 
condi tion originally laid do"m in the President's 1 December decision, 
but which now appeared unlikely to be attained. 
(ii) Under the prevailing acutely unstable conditions "as an 
emergency stimulant hopefully to create unity at home and restore failing 
morale." 
(iii) As a unilateral U.S. action "to compensate for reduced 
in-country U. S. presence," if such reduction were to be undertaken .. 
A similarly unprepossessing vieTtT of "stronger action" alternatives 
was probably presented to the ¥resident by Rusk. 
The files contain no 
12 · 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
direct record of the Secretary's presentation to the President during this 
period,but a set of notes ~ 
put together in preparation for a Rusk 
meeting with the President on January 6 by Assistant Secretary William Bundy', 
Special Assistant Michael Forrestal and Deputy Assistant Secretary Leonard 
Unger, laid out tne alternatives in some detail. 
Recognizing that a 
"coming apart" of the GVN would most likely take the form of covert nego-
tiations by key governmental groups with the NLF, leading eventually to 
the U,S, being invited out, Rusk's principal Vietnam advisers argued that 
this was one possible "Vietnamese solution,1I but hardly a desirable one: 
It would still be virtually certain that Laos would then 
become untenable and that Cambodia would accommodate in some way . 
Most seriously, there is grave question whether the Thai in these 
circumstances would retain any confidence at all in our continued 
support. 
In short, the outcome would be regarded in Asia, and 
particularly among our friends, as just as humiliating a defeat 
as any other form. 
As events have developed, the American public 
would probably not be too sharply critical, but the real question 
would be whether Thailand and other nations "lere vreakened and taken 
over thereafter. 
The alternative of stronger action obviously has grave diffi-
culties. It commits the US more deeply, at a time vrhen the picture 
of South Vietnamese will is extremely weak. 
To the extent that it 
included actions against North Vietnam, it would be vigorously 
attacked by many nations and disapproved initially even by such 
nations as Japan and India, on present indications. 
Most basically, 
its stiffening effect on the Saigon political situation would not 
be at all sure 'to bring about a more effective government, nor 
would limited actions against the southern DRV in fact sharply 
reduce infiltration or, in present circQmstances, be at all likely 
to induce Hanoi to call it off. 
;Nonetheless, on balance we believe that such action vrould have 
some faint hope of really improving the Vietnamese situation, and, 
above all, would put us in a much stronger position to hold the next 
line of defense, n~mely Thailand. 
Accepting the present situation--
or any negotiation on the basis of it--vrould be far weaker from this 
latter key standpoint. If we moved into stronger actions, we should 
have in mind that negotiations would be likely to emerge from some 
quarter in any event, and that under existing circumstances, even 
with the additional element of pressure, we could not expect to get 
an outcome that would really secure an independent South Vietnam. 
Yet even on an outcome that produced a prugressive deterioration 
in South Vietnam and an eventual Communist takeover, we would still 
have appeared to Asians to have done a lot more about it.
IF 
Turning then to specific alternatives, Bundy and his colleagues 
envisioned five proposals : 
13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitiye 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
a. 
An early occasion for reprisal action against the DRV. 
b. 
Possibly beginning low-level reconnaissance of the DRV 
at once. 
. 
c. 
Concurrently with a or b, an early orderly withdrawal of 
our dependents. 
We all thi~k this would be a grave mistake in the 
absence of stronger action, and if taken in isolation would tre-
mendously increase the pace of deterioration in Saigon. If we are 
to clear our decks in this way--and we are more and more inclined 
to think we should--it simply must be; for this reason alone, in 
the context of ~ 
stronger action. 
d. 
Intensified air operations in Laos may have some use, but 
they will not meet the problem of Saigon morale and, if continued 
at a high level, may raise significant possibilities of Communist 
intervention on a substantial scale in Laos with some plausible 
justification. 
We have gone about as far as we can go in Laos by the 
existing limiting actions,' and, apart from cutting Route 7, we would 
not be accomplishing much militarily by intensifying US air actions 
there. 
This form of action thus has little further to gain in the 
Laos context, and has no real bearing at this point on the South 
Vietnamese cGntext. 
e. 
Introduction of limited US ground forces into the northern 
area of South Vietnam still has great appeal to many of us, con-
currently with the first air attacks into the DRV. 
It would have 
a real stiffening effect in Saigon, and a strong signal effect to 
Hanoi. 
On the disadvantage side, such forces would be possible 
attrition targets for the Viet Congo 
For your information, the 
Australians have clearly indicated (most recently yesterday) that 
they might be disposed to participate in such an operation. 
The 
New Zealanders are more negative and a proposal for Philippine 
participation would be an interesting test." 
Whether and how these alternatives were posed for the President is 
not recorded, but at least two of the actions--getting the U.S. dependents 
out of Vietnam and reacting promptly and firmly to the next reprisal oppor-
tunity--were also recommended to another top presidential advisor, namely 
to Secretary McNamara, by Assistant Secretary John McNaughton, in a 
McNaughton memorandum ~ that he discussed with McNamara on January 27. 
The memorandum contains McNaughton's pencil notations of McNamara's com-
ments on various points, which suggest that the Secretary of Defense was 
di~satisfied with the way U.S. Vietnam policy was "drifting" and seemed 
a good deal less dubious than was McNaughton about the potential benefits 
to be derived from initiating 'air strikes against the DRV. 
14 
TOP SECRET - Sensitiv.e 
, , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In the meantime, a 7 January 1965 conference of SEACORD (the 
coordinating mechanism of the U.S, ambassadors and military commanders 
in Southeast Asia) had reviewed the accomplishments of the first few 
weeks of Phase I--the 30-day program of mild bARREL ROLL, YANKEE TEAM 
and other operations--and had concluded that the results were militarily 
negligible. 
SEACORD recommended an extension of the operations for 
another 30 days, and their intensification as Iran effective tonic [for 
the Gvti7, particularly if accompanied by serious joint preparations and 
timely initiation of retaliatory and Phase II operations against the 
DRV. II ?JJ 
The most forceful restatement of the reprisal policy, however, 
came from the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the end of January, in the form 
of a memorandRm to the Secretary of Defense ~ reviewing earlier JCS 
recommendations on reprisals and noting that the ·continued lack of aU. S. 
response to major enemy provocations risked inviting more such actions. 
They urged that the next significant provocation be met with a IIpositive, 
timely, and appropriate response ... undertaken preferably within twenty-four 
hours, against selected targets in the DRV.II?:}:j 
They appended to their . 
memorandum a resume of possible reprisal actions of varying intensities, 
for which plans were available and the strike forces at hand to carry out 
these actions. 
The most intensive preparations had already been made, 
particularly in connection with the forthcoming resumption of the DESOTO 
Patrols, to which a reprisal operation vTas explicitly linked as a contin-
gency option, under the code name FLM~NG DART . 
These preparations and 
the evolution of the readiness posture associated with this and other 
potential. reprisal actions is revie"I'Jed briefly in the next section. 
15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
III. DESOTO AS A REPRISAL OPPORTUNITY -- MID THE DECISION TO SUSPEND 
Detailed and specific reprisal preparations had been underway for 
many months prior to February 1965, most prominently in connection with 
the periodi~ DESOTO Patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin. 
The patrols were 
' 
suspended after the ~ugu st 2 and 4, 1964 incidents, when the destroyer 
patrol group had been fired upon, giving rise to the first U.S. retalia-
tory strikes. 
They ''lere resumed on 12 September, and at that time were 
believed to have been again attacked, or at least "menaced," by unfriendly 
vessels on the night of 18 September. 
That incident, however, was con-
sidered as too ambiguous by Washington officials to justify a reprisal 
action. 
The patrol was once more suspended on 20 September. 
In order to be properly prepared for an attack on any future patrol, 
military authorities began to work up a :pre-packaged set of reprisal 
targets that might be politically acceptable, with pre-assigned forces 
that would be in a high state of readiness to strike these targets, and 
with a detailed strike plan that would provide a range of retaliatory 
options. Accordingly, CINCPAC, on instructions from the JCS, developed 
appropriate pl~s and issued a series of Fragmentary Operations Orders 
under the colorful caption, "Punitive and Crippling Re2;lrisal Actions on 
Targets in ~1VN ." 25/ 
The orden; :provided for air strikes to be conducted 
against selected target s in North Vietnam in retaliation for DRV attacks 
against the DESOTO Patrol, if the patrol 'Here resumed and attacked. 
T-'~ o 
levels of retaliation res:ponse ,,,ere :prescribed, 'with t wo target options 
each (all located south of the 19th parallel!), with the various options 
scaled to the extent and severity of damage inflicted upon the patrol. 
A high alert posture ,vas to be maintained during the days the patrol was 
in progress, such that the strikes could be l aunched 'ITithin one hour 
after receipt of the execution order. 
The retaliatory forces were to be 
carefully prepositioned and rules of engagement were meticulously spelled 
out. ?!J 
While these prepar ations vTere initially associated exclusively with 
the DESOTO Patrol, it was recognized that reprisals might also be called 
for in retaliation for any type of serious provocation whi ch could occur 
without ''larning, could be caused by the DRV or by the VC, and might be' 
directed against US or GVN forc es . 
But the high alert status ordered 
in connection ,vi th the DESOTO Patrols could be maintained for only short 
periods of time. 
A more sustained capability vT8,s also needed, and the JCS 
pre:pared an outline plan for further elaboration by CINCPAC, calling for 
a more limited reprisal action that could be launched ,'lith the least 
possible delay with forces in place and 'Ilith a readiness posture normally 
maintained. ~ The forces expected to be available for such strikes were 
o.pe CVA air wing, t wo squadrons of B-57, tlvo squadrons of F-I05, three 
squadrons of F-lOO, and approximately one squadron of VNAF A-lH; and the 
targets considered most suitable were: 
16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Targe~ No. 33 - Dong Hoi Barracks 
36 - Vit T~1U Lu Army Barracks 
39 - Chap Le Army Barracks' 
52 - Vinh Army Supply Depot E 
71 
Ben Thuy Port Facilities 
All of these prepar ations came to a head at the end of January, "Then 
a tentative decision had evidently been reached in Washington to authorize 
res\unption of the DESOTO Patrols on or about 3 February. 
A JCS directive 
to that effect ,.Tent out to Cn·TCPAC on 28 J anuary, 28/ requesting CHJC PAC 
to issue the necessary Operat'ional Plan, covering atlvo destroyer Patrol 
Group with on-line Crypto RATT and Star Shell illumination capabilities. 
Interestingly, the instructions ,.Jere explicit to the effect that the 
"Patrol track shall not be provocative, with the Patrol Group remaining 
30 nautical miles £'rom both NVN mainland and Hainan Island and South of 
20 degrees North latitude." The Patrol was to be continued for a period 
of three days, during which time SP-2 aircraft ,.Tith searchlight and flare 
capability Were to support the Patrol Group during hours of d&rkness by 
assisting in contact investigation and clarification, and a Combat Air 
Patrol was to be airborne in the vicinity of the Patrol during daylight 
and to be on immediate call during darkness: Instructions also called 
for carefully dissociating the Patrol from OP~l 34A operations in and 
over the Gulf of Tonkin 48 hours before, during, and 48 hours following 
completion of the Patrol. 
Rules of engagement, in the event of attack, were as follows: 
a. 
The Patrol ships and aircraft are authorized to attack 
with the objective of insuring destruction of any vessel or 
aircraft ,.Thich attacks, or gives positive indication of intent 
to attack, US forces operating in international vaters or air-
space over international ,.Taters. 
b. 
In event of hostile attack, the Patrol ships and aircraft 
are directed to fire u)on the hostile attacker with the objective 
of insuring destruction. 
Ships are aut~ori zed to pursue the 
enemy to the recognized three mile territorial limit. Aircraft 
are authorized hot pursuit inside territorial l.;raters (three miles) 
against surface ves;els and into hostile air space (includes DRV, 
Hainan Island and Mainland China) against attack aircraft when 
necessary to achieve destruction of identified attack forces. 
Ships and aircraft i'Till confine their actions to the attacking 
ships and/or aircraft. 
In the days following, attention centered on pl~ns for the reprisal 
strike. 
A number of l ast-minute changes were made in the t argets that 
had been recommended by CI}:CPAC and the JCS, in order to reduce the risk 
of aircraft losses and to reduce sortie requirements. 
The launching 
date for the DESOTO Patrol I'Jas Dostuoned from the 3rd to the 7th of' 
February, and the JCS asked CmcPAc-'?!1/ to re-order its reprisal t argets 
17 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
into three attack options, consisting respective~ of three, five, and 
seven specified targets, and to plan to conduct the air strikes against 
them, as directed, by option or by target, in any combination. 
The 
options and targ ;ts, together with estimated snrties, 'Vlere as follm>ls: 
strike 
Option One 
Tgts 33 
Dong Hoi Barracks 
24 
36 
Vit Thu Lu Barracks 
24 
39 
Chap Le Barracks 
40 
Total. ••• 
80 
Option TVlO 
Tgts 33, 36, 39 of Option One, plus: 
24 
Chanh Hoa Barracks 
28 
32 
VU Con Barracks 
Total. •.• 
_ Option Three 
Tgts 33, 36, 39, 24, 32 of Option 
14 Thanh Hoa Bridge 
74 Quang Khe Naval Base 
Total. •.• 
10 
126 
Tvro ,plus: 
32 
22 
180 
Fla.~ 
8 
8 
12 
28 
12 
8 
48 
12 
4 
64 
CAP 
8 
4 
4 
16 
12 
4 
32 
4 
2 
38 
TOTAL 
40 
36 
56 
132 
52 
22 
206 
48 
28 
282 
Of these seven targets, six 'were south of t...1.e 19th parallel, and on the 
November "Torking group I s reprisal target list; one, the Thanh Hoa Bridge, 
Target ·14 in Option Three, ,'TaS north of the 19th parallel. 
The strikes against these targets were to em~loy the US forces then 
in mainland Southeast As ia in their alerted and augmented state (,vi th an 
additional F105 squadron from the Philippines at Da Nang),plus up to 
3 CVAs; but they 'VTould also provide for strikes from a non-alert status, 
i.e., with US forces normally in-coQntry, plus CVA normally on station. 
Strikes from a non-alert status, if ordered, would be simultaneous, 
launched w'ithin the minimu.m feasible reaction time, and as near as prac-
ticable to first light following the reprisal incident. 
CINCPAC was also 
asked to mal<;:e flpreliminary provisions " for a strike at Target 32-- VU Con 
Barracks in OZltion TIro above -- to be conducted by VNAF, l>li th assista.nce 
from US fla.k suppression, CAP, pathfinder, and SJL~. 
These provisions were 
not to be revealed to the GVN at that time, since the inclusion of this 
VNAF strike migh:t or might not be ordered, depending on the circumstances.12I 
CINCPAC responded the follmving day by issuing Operation Order 
FLAIH1"IJG DART, directing its Air Force and Navy Component Comrna.l1ds to be 
prepared to conduct air strikes 'Vrhen directed, against the above targets 
by option, or against any combination of the above targets within or 
between options, in retaliation for attacks on the DESOTO Patrol. 
18 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
.. , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
CINCPACFLT vTaS assigned Targets 33 and 36 or
n O:;Jtion One , 24 of Option 1"tlO, 
and 74 of Option Three. 
CINCPACAF vTas assigned Targets 39 of Option One, 
32 of Option 1\ro, and 14 of OJ!tion Three. Aircraft 'ITould be armed with 
optimum conventicmal ordnance for the target to be attacked, excluding 
napalm. 31/ 
Operation Order F~iG DART placed the US in a highly flexible 
position. It provided a vehicle for a quick reprisal decision in the 
eventuality of an attack on the DESOTO Patrol or of any other provocation, 
such as a dramatic VC incident in South Vietnam. 
The particular targets 
involved had been briefed to the principal decision-makers, had the virtue 
of being knoim and understood by them, and even had their tentative appro-
val. Moreover, nearly all the targets were in the far south of North 
Vietnam and all could be a.ssociated with infiltration, which "Tere t yro of 
the conditions l aid dmm in the guidelines for retaliating against the 
North for spectacv~ar incidents in the South. 
The O~eration Order there-
for e, served well as a generalized pre-planned reprisal target package, 
offering a Hide spectrum of choices. 
To gain an impression of the alert posture of the strike forces 
poised .for action, the table belovT sets forth the varying Height of 
attack that could be brought to bear at different reaction t imes : 
(CHART, page 20) 
The DESOTO Patrol, hOvlever, which had been the major focus for the 
reprisal planning, '<Tas never to carry out its ass i gned role. 
On 4 Febru-
ary, three days before the Patrol ,Tas to begin its operation, the Chair-
man of the JCS informed CINCPAC and all interested posts and commands . . 
that authority to execute DESOTO Has cancelled, in vieiv 'of Soviet Premier 
Kosygin's :L.mminent four-day visit to Hanoi that vTaS to begin on 6 February. ' 
"DESOTO patrol concurrent Hith Kosygin visit or immediately thereafter," 
wrote the CJCS, "could be interpreted as reaction to visit, thereby im-
pairing ardcomplicating US-Sov-iet relations. II 33/ 
The decision to call off the Patrol in deference to Kosygin's visit, 
reflected a grmving feeling in some parts of the Administration that the 
rerre,-Ted involvement of the Soviet Union in Southeast Asia, after its 
hands-off policy of almost three years' standing, might, on balance, be 
a good thing for the U.S. 
While some FJnerican experts interpreted 
MOSCQlol'S November, 1964 pledge of military assistance to Hanoi and 
Kosygin's visit in February 1965 as a sure sign that the Soviet Union 
saw the collaps~ of the US venture in SV'N as imminent and wanted merely 
to stake its claim in apposition to Peking before it ,-ras too late, others 
qelieved that the USSR mi~~t well find it in its interest to act as an 
agent of moderation and compromise, providing the U.S. with an avenue of 
graceful retreat from a seemingly irretrievable situation. 
19 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
' TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
STRIKE FORCES AVAIL..ABLE FOR REPRIS}\.L ACTIONS AGAINST TARGETS IN 
LAOS AND NORT'".cl VIETNAH ( as of 29 Jan' 65)' 32/ 
'STRIKE, 
OReES ' 
REACTION TII'IfE '( ROURS ) 
~----------------------~~~~ 
! 
l~/ 
' . 
~/ 
' lr)/ -: 
4P)±/ 
72 
'AFTER 
72 
,I : 
I 
I ,USAF 
B-57 
; (DeSoto 
I 
Patrol) 
28-Bien Roa 
I " 
, 
4-
i 28-Bien Roa 
5-Bien Roa' 
I 
S 
A 
M 
E 
Same as 
48 hr. 
column 
plus rol..' 
1
. 
I 
ow~ng 
: 
deploy-
' 
: ments: 
il 
I 
I 
! 18-Conus 
; 
I 
i to Clark ' 
S 
A 
M 
E 
F_IOO
i 36-Da Nang 
j'lS-Takhli 
F-I051S-Da. Nang 
lS-Korat 
B-52 
12-Da Nang 
~ 36-Da Nang 
12-Tak~li : 18-Tak~li 
2-6"':Da Nang' 18-Da Nang 
6-
i 18-Korat 
i i8-Conus : 
10-Korat 
I to 91ark i 
i 
I. ' 
30-Guam j. 
I 
\' . 
CVA 
I 
A-4 '/ 
48 
A-I 
24 
A-3 I 
9 
F-4/8 I 
40-46 
USHC 
MAG 
--~----~--~
' ----T----
t· 72 
I 
24 
12 
6 
20-23 
24 
12 
6 
20-23 
48 
24 I 
9 
i 
40-46 ; I 
S 
A 
M 
E 
I 
36 
15 
I 60-69 
\ 
I ., 
A-4 
47-Da Nanel 
--0 . 
r 
~!Whl~~~I----~--~I----~--~--~----1 
f A-IR \ 
11 _. _ 
11 
60 
______ i 
NOTES: 32/ ' (l~eyed ,to repris8.1 actions des cribed in i\::;'Jendi x :0 to 
- , 
JCSM ,70-65, 29 J an 65, TOP SECREl') 
1/ DeSoto Patrol reprisal forces. 
Only case in Vlhich forces are 
-
prepositioned J held in alert status and prepared to conduct 
reprisal attacks 'Hithout delay. 
2/ Forces :i.rrtmediately available under normal conditions. 
"3/ USAF fully deployed. 
Only one carrier a·.,railable. 
"4/ Could conduct all s t r ikes in CINCPAC FRA..G ORDER #3. 
60 VNAF 
-
, sorties available ,each day at expense of pa cification program . 
. By 31 Jan 65 J 75 VHA...'" sorties a vailable. 
~ 
.' 20 
TOP SECREl' 
Sensitive 
.--------~-.-------
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
This view vlas certainly held by some State Department experts, par-
ticularly in the Office of Asian Communist Affairs (ACA ) and in the 
Office of Intelligence and Research (I1~). In an interesting memorandum 
of February 5, 1965 to 'iiilliam Bundy, Lindsay Grant of ACA saw the impli-
cations for American policy of the Kosygin visit to Hanoi as ltenormous.!I 
It is possible to hypothesize that the Soviet initiative 
may be intended 'to present the United States vTith an acceptable, 
albeit difficult, choice. 
They may presume that the situation 
in the South would deteriorate to the point ylhere we could 
foresee ourselves confronted ''lith the possibility of: 
I} 
a series of defeats on the ground and/or total collapse 
of authority in Saigon, or 
2) 
a rapid movement in the direction of neutralism, lead-
ing to our being invited out, or 
3; 
some kind of negotiated settlement which would permit 
us to reduce our commitment to the bare bones, and thereby at 
least minimize a generally distasteful loss. 
The last prospect, 
which would represent the best of a bad choice, could possibly 
result from an increased Soviet presence in North Viet-Nam. 
ThUS, the Soviets might find it in their oym interest to 
propose to Hanoi a solu:tion of the vlar in Viet-Nam along the 
following lines: 
lJ North Viet-Nam '-[QuId remain untouched, with the Soviet 
Union guaranteeing to provide major economic and other help; 
2) 
South Viet-Nam would be neutralized, with some sort of 
paper guarantee offered by outside powers, including the Soviet 
Union; 
3) 
The National Front for t he Liberation of South Viet-Nam 
would participate in a neutralist coalition government. 
(The Soviet Union would, presLUnably ,give North Viet-Nam 
private assurances. that it would not sta...'1d in the \'lay of further 
Front and Viet Cong efforts to gain a complete political victory 
in the South.) 
The author of the memorandum, of course, recognized that it would be 
only under the ~ rospec t of a collapse of the c\m or of being requested to 
leave that the U.S. would be willing to accede to the solutions suggested. 
But he stressed, as the major benefit of this course, that: 
••• the Soviet presence vlould represent a major deflection 
of the ri sing Chinese Communist tide in Southeast Asia in par-
ticular , and in its vlorld-vlide efforts at subversion in general. 
21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A somewhat s~ilar view was echoed subsequently in a SEACORD con-
ference, the sense of which was reported in a Saigon message to the 
Secretary of State. 34/ 
The relevant arguments vTere to the effect 
that : 
(1) 
TheDRV is almost entirely dependent both economically 
and militarily upon the Chinese Communists i'l'ho see great value 
in having the DRV continue this exclusive dependence; 
(2) . The Soviet Union is' the only alternative source of 
economic and military su:pport to Hanoi ";vhich would enable the 
DRV to remain viable if it decided to cease its aggression; 
(3) It is therefore im~ortant that the Soviets receive 
accurate indications that 
i·r~ would not o'O'Oose a continuing Soviet 
role in the DRV, although this is not a ~~tter on which the U.S. 
can take an initiative. 
Subsequent events on the negotiating front, and the role we believed 
the USSR could play on that front, also lend support to the vie'ir that , at 
least in the early part of 1965, there IITas a fairly vridespread belief 
among U.S. policy-makers that the Soviet Union could and probably would 
exert a benign i nfluence upon Hanoi. 
There is, indeed, some evidence that the USSR itself had some such 
thought in.mind in connection with Kosygints February visit. 
Peking, 
at least, has charged that Kosygin had tried at that time to persue.de 
both Hanoi and Peking to negotiate some kind of settlement 'I'I'i th the 
United states, reportedly involving a Ilface-saving" U.S. i-Tithdrawal. TIl 
In any event, there seems little doubt that the decision to forego 
the DESOTO Patrol vTas inspired by the hope, if not expectation, that 
Kosygin ifOuld, from the US point of view, weigh ' in constructively in 
the Vietnam struggle. 
22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TV. 
FLAMING DART I AN}) II -- THE ll1PERCEPTIBLE TRA.WSITION 
A. 
The First Reprisal 
The lorg months of contingency plan~ing, hesitation, and agoni zed 
debate were suddenly cut short on February 7th, ,,,hen the VC struck the 
American installations at Pleiku and Camp Hollm"ay. 
This time the Presi~ 
dent shm'led the same decisiveness and swift reaction that he had displayed 
six months earlier in the Gulf of Tonkin. 
The decision to strike back I'Tas 
reached in a 75 minute meeting of the National Security Council on the 
evening of February 6 (Washington time) in the Cabinet Room of the White 
House, and in the presence of Senate Hajority Leader Mike Hansfield and 
House Speaker John McCormack . 
McGeorge Bundy, on his mission to Saigon 
at the time, had joined Ambassador Taylor and General Westmoreland in 
recommending prompt retaliation in telecoms i-!ith the President from the 
communications center in Saigon. 
The strike, carried out during the early morning hours of the 7th 
(Washington time) ,,,as , at least militarily, something of a fizzle. 
The 
mildest of the three attack ontions was selected for the strike, but when' 
the executive order "laS flash~d, only one of the three CVA I s (USS Ranger) 
wason station at Point Yankee. 
The other tiW (Han cock and Coral Sea) 
had been stood down to a 96-hour alert after the cancellation of the 
DESO'rO Patrol and were enroute to assignments elsellhel'e . 
They ,,,ere 
urgently recalled by CINCPAC to participate in the strike, which had to . 
be delayed lliltil the CVA I S returned to Doints from which their aircraft 
could reach the assigned targets. 
The ;eather, hov.Jever, was very adverse, 
causing a large number of sorties to abort, with the result that only one 
of the three assigned t argets llaS struck in force. 36/ 
In order to 
stiffen the reprisal and to make it clearly a joint-US-GVN response, the 
target was restruck the follmTing day (February 8) by the US carrier 
aircraft that had aborted the previous day, and a VNAF strike by 24 A-lH IS' 
sU9Ported by USAF pathfinder, flak suppression and CAP aircraft, was 
carried out against target 32 (Vu Con Barracks) concurrently. 37/ 
B. 
Timing of Pleiku and the Kosygin Visit 
As Has indicated earlier, the U.S. had put off the DESOTO Patrol 
that had been scheduled for February 7 so as to avoid any appearance of 
provocativeness vis-a-vis Kosygin, who ''laS to arrive in Hanoi on February 6. 
And yet it Has precisely then, at the very beginning of the Kosygin visit, 
that the VC laQnched their sgectacular attack on the US installations. 
This had l ed many to conjecture that t he raid was deliberately organized 
and timed by the hardliners in Hanoi so as to nip in the bud any possible 
Soviet peace initiative or in other ,,,ays to put Kosygin on the spot 0 
Whether Hanoi specifically ordered the Plei ku attack or ,,,hether 
the VC merely received H~noi's blessing for ~ne attack remains speculative. 
There can be little doubt, hOHever, that Hanoi 1tTaS fully informed and had 
ample reason to favor the action . 
Robert Shaplen argues that, from Hanoi's 
point of vie';{, 
23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitiile 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
it had more to gain than lose by having the attack take 
place while Kosygin was present, even though it might embarrass 
him, as it very likely did. If the Americans failed to respond, 
the North Vietnamese could argue that t he United States was 
indeed a pc-per tiger, and that all that ,:as needed for the war 
to be brought to a successful conclusion in the south was some 
additional militRry assistance. If the United States did 
respond, the North Vietnamese could claim that more aid was 
necessary to prosecute the ,-Tar lUlder more difficult circum-
st~Dces, ~Dd they could then reasonably . ask for planes and de-
fensive miss iles vTith I-Thich to protect their own cities, too. 
Since Kosygin was vTooing North Vietnam for Russia's own purposes 
as much as Hanoi was vTooing him to help it regain some balance 
between MoscOl" and Peking, the Russian Premier ,ms hardly in a 
position' to leave Hanoi in a huff, Hhi ch besides "Tould have made 
him look foolish. 38/ 
Although the onset of the bombing no doubt took the Russians by 
surprise, they probably viewed it as a futile l ast-ditch effort by 
Washington to strengchen its bargaining position rather than as a prelude 
to ne .. T escalation. 
In any event, Kosygin' s reaction in Hanoi was re-
strained . 
He -point ed out that the situation lias "fraught with serious 
complicat ions tr- and seemed to be favoring a negotiated termination. 121 
In any event, in keeping with the vie,'T held in several influential 
A:hninistration quarters that the USSR might be a valuable moderating 
influence upon Hanoi, W'ashington took pains to assure liIOSCOli that 
Kosygin's presence in Hanoi during the US reprisal strikes of February 
7-8 was an lUlfortunate coincidence and no affront to the Soviet Union 
was intended. 
c. 
The Reprisal Rationale and I ts Public Handling 
On the morning after the reprisal order had been issued ·(Febru-
ary 7), a second NSC meeting ,vas convened at the W'bite House to agree on 
an appropriate text for the vThit e House statement and to discuss the 
content of a McNamara press briefing at the Pentagon, called for that 
afternoon. 
The public handling of the raids was of crucial importance 
in conveying to Hanoi scrae iQ~ling of what the implications of the 
reprisal action were for future U.S. responses and for the future U.S. 
role in the Vietnamese 'Har, ,vi thout at the same time arousing lUldue 
anxieties at home and in the rest of the Horld. 
It is vTorth noting that thel~e 11Tere im::;Jortant differences between 
the February 7-3 ::caids and the earlier strike 3 in the Gulf of Tonkin 
incident . 
The August Toru~in strikes had clearly been presented as a one-
time retaliatory action in res'Jonse to a North Vietnamese attack on US 
naval pOlver in international '·T~ters . 
In more or less ti t-for-tat fashion, 
the strikes had been carri ed out by US Navy aircraft ~Dd. h;:;.d been directed 
primarily against the offending NVN patrol boats in their bases. 
As an 
extra punitive measure , POL storage tw...ks associated "'Tith one of the 
24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
patrol boat bases I'Tere also hit, but no attempt vias made to destroy base 
facilities, and the entire operation was a unilateral U.S. action. 
Publicly, the Tonkin strikes had been depicted as a "positive 
replyll -- one I"hich vTaS "limited but fitting" -- to an unprovoked attack 
on US vessels operating vTithin their rights on the high seas. 
The 
" 
h .L" 
J.. 
"" 'th 
t· 
1 
t 
d . t 
1 . . t 1 
one-s 0 l" 
navure oJ.. 
e s rl.n:es 'Has s ressed, an 
l 
vras exp lCl 
y 
stated that, provided there were no further enemy attacks, the US con-
sidered the incident closed. 
Together viith declarations that the US 
strikes were not intended to expand or escalate the guerrilla vrar in 
Southeast ASia,this tended to make the strikes appear as an isolated 
action, bearing only incidental relat .ionship to the war itself. 
The war 
continued to be officially pictured as one being fought by the South 
Vietnamese, with the US in a strictly limited supporting role. It is true 
that stiff warnings were sent to Hanoi through discrete diplomatic 
channels (ICC Commissioner Seaborne's August visit), stressing that US 
patience 'ilas wearing thin and that the DRV could ex.pect to suffer the 
consequences if it persisted in its aggressive course, but U.S. public 
statements made it clear that the strikes 'Here not intended to change 
the basic ground rules of the conflict at that time. 
The strikes were 
intended primarily to demonstrate that North Vietnam could not flagrantly 
attack U. S. forces '\'lith imp1.m.ity; but nothing Has said publicly to imply 
that the North could not continue its activities in the South without 
fear that its own territory '\-TOuld be placed in jeopardy. 
By contrast 'with the Ton..'k:in strikes, the February 1965 raids, 
while also initiated as reprisals, were intended to be explicitly linked 
with the "larger pattern of aggression" by North Vietnam, and were 
designed to signal a change in the ground rules of the conflict in the 
South. 
By retaliating against North Vietnam for a VC incident in the 
South, the US consCioUSly made its first open bre &-'k: vIith self-imposed 
ground rules Hhich had permitted the North to direct and support the ,var 
in the South, but I'Thich had precluded direct US countermeasures against 
the North ' s territory. 
The stri..'k:es thus ,'fere to serve clear notice upon 
all concerned that the US ,vould not abide by such rules in the future. 
But the change in groul'.d rules also ,?osed serious public infor-
mation and stage managing problems for the President. Until the February 
raids, and especially t.hroughol.lt the election c8.mpaign of 1964, the case 
had regularly been made that the insurrection in th~ South vTaS essentially ' 
a home-grmm affair and largely self-supporting; nm-r the argUIIlent had to 
be turned around and public o:?inion persuaded that there really 'Ivouldn't 
be much difficulty cleaning up the South if infiltrators from the North 
,.,ould just go home and "leave their neighbors alone ." 
In the White House press release immediately folloviing the re-
prisal, ther efore , Raj or emphas is was placeG. on Hai1.oi' s role in the South: 
•.. these attacks were only made possible by the continuing 
infiltration of person..nel and equipm~1.t from North Vietnam. 
This 
25 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
infiltration markedly increased during 1964 and continues to 
increase .!1 ••• tiThe key to the situation remains the cessation 
of infiltration fyom North Vietnam and the clear indication. 
that it is prepared to cease aggression against its neighbors. ' ~ 
Another major ne"T departure of the 7-8 February strikes "TaS 
that they were intended to be at least a first steu in more directly and 
actively associating the US "rith t he South Vietnam~ se in "their't war. 
Thus "Thile the retaliation I'Tas precipitated by the Pleiku incident, it 
was considered essential to justify it in broader terms -- not merely 
as a response to a single outrage committed against Americans, but as 
a response to a series of outrages , corrillritted against South Vietnamese 
as \vell as Americans. 
. 
Thus, the '\-Ihite House press release and, even more explicitly, 
the McNamara press briefing of February 7 41/ spoke of three VC attacks, 
all tlordered and directed by the Hanoi regime,tI but only one of these 
was t he Pleiku-Camp HollovTay r aia. agai nst U. S. installation. 
The t"TO 
other s cited in justification of the reprisal ",-vere attacks on Viet-
namese villages in which, it was carefully pointed out,no American 
casualties vTere sustained. 
This effort to link the reprisal to VC offenses against both 
parties was reinforced by having the reprisal strikes conducted by both 
South Vietnamese and US forces. 
McNama;a 's statement heavily stressed 
the fact that tlelements of t he U. S. and South Vietnamese Air Forces 
"Jere directed to launch joint retaliatory attacks •.• tI 
By demonstrating that the US "ras pr epared to join 'vi th t:1e 
South Vietnamese in military r eprisals against North Vietn&~ for actions 
committed against either or both parti es in the South, the strikes t ended 
to weaken the policy line , assiduously adhered to up to that time, that 
the war was essentially 8, Vietn2IUese ivar 
wi t h US involvement confined to 
advice and support . 
Once the US began participati ng in such military 
reprisals on a regular basis , it "rould unavoidably begin to appear as 
more of a co-belliger ent, along vrith South Vietnam, against the VC and 
their s~nsors in Nort h Vi etnam. 
The practical significance . of this point is obvious . 
As long 
as the U. S. maintained the policy line that it Tilas not really directly 
- engaged in the war , it had to deny its forces many proposed military 
actions in Southeast Asia, and had to impose on itself severe political 
constrai nts in its military operations. 
The abandonment of this policy 
line as a r esult of reprisal acti ons li!(e FLAJ'ffilG DA..RT "lOuld open the 
.way to a much wider range of politically acceptable US military options 
in Vietnam. 
The 7 -$ February strH:e s, ho-Hever, "Jere only a limited and 
tentative first step , a.'1cl far from an irrevocabl e commitment to the 
broader course of action they foreshadovTed. 
The governing concept 
26 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
was still "tit-for-tat". 
The White House statement stressed the phrase 
"appropriate reprisal action" a.n.d, likening it to the Gulf of T::m2dn 
incident, characterized the response as siJnilarly "appropriate apci. 
fi tting. ,t 
The idea of equivalent punishment was conveyed by confining the 
strikes to a quite limited number of targets plausibly as sociated with 
infiltration. 
Thus the possibility was left open that these reprisals 
were strictly one-shot operations that '/lould be carried out only in the 
event of spectacular enemy actions. 
But the public language was both 
ominous and ambiguous: 
"As the U. S. Goverfl..rnent has frequently stated, 
we seek no vrider Ifar. 
\-Thether or not this course can be maintained l:'es 
with the North Vietnamese aggressors ." In fact, h01fever, there was l::.ttle 
expectation, that the North Vietnamese would "cease theil' acgression," 
and every expectation tha t the U.S. would go beyond a policy of event-
associated reprisals. 
For immediately following. the first press release, 
the White House issued another significant presidential statement, order-
ing Ifhat had long been recommended: 
" ••. 1 have directed the orderly ivithdral'Tal of .American 
dependents from South Vietnam ••. We have no choice nO"T but to 
clear the decks and mru~e absolutely clear our continued de-
termination to back South Vietnam .•. II 42/ 
And as furthe~ ::'ndication that much more than a mere occasional reprisal 
'was in the offing, McNamara met ,vi th the JCS on the follOlving day to 
request that they prepare and submit to hiJn their recommendations for 
an eight-;.reek air strike campaign against infiltration-associated tar-
gets in the Im·rer portion of North Vietnam as a sustained reply to any 
further provocations. 43/ 
. 
D. 
An Act of Defiance 
The flashing red vrarning signals -- if that is "lhat they w'ere --
were not heeded by Hanoi. 
On the contrary, in what ,fas regarded by some 
observers as a calculated act of defiance, the VC staged another dramatic 
attack on 10 February, this one against a US enlisted men's billet in 
Qui Nhon, inflicting the heaviest single loss of American personnel yet. 
Within 24 hours, US and South Vietnamese aircraft executed the largest 
retaliatory air strike of the ,mr up to that time. 
Named FLM.-ITNG DART II, 
28 VNAF A-lH's and 20 USAF F-IOO' s hit Chap Le. 
Simultaneously, Navy 
aircraft stru~~ Chanh Hoa not far from Dong Hoi, just north of the D~~. 
This t~ .me, significantly, the strike3 \Tere not characterized as 
a reprisal lifl~ed to the immediate incident. 
Instead, the White House 
r€lease of February 11,. ~ listed a long series of VC incidents and 
attack s that had occurred since February 8, most of 'fhich were not 
"spectacular" but quite normal features of the Vietnam war . 
The state-
ments moreover characterized the US air strL~es as '8. more generalized 
27 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
response to these "further direct provocations by the Hanoi reg:i1ne," and 
to these !tcontinued acts of aggression. 1I 
The words IIretaliation!t and 
"reprisal" "Jere carefully avoided and the joint US/GVN statement released 
in Saigon the same day actually characterized the air attack action for 
the first time as TI air o:;Jerations.!t 
The cha.YJ.ge tn t erminology from "retaliat ion!! or "re:prisal" to 
"response,!! from a specific set of incidents to "continued aggression," 
and :f-.com a single attack tC'l !tair operations" was clearly delibere.te. 
A strict reprisal policy,although permitting the US to strike the North, 
would have left the i nitiative in the enemy's hands and 1'lOuld have re-
stricted the US to the kinds of responses that could be represented as 
equivalent or "fitting . TI 
But, more important, the ne.".l terminology re-
flected a conscious U.S. decision to broaden the reprisal concept as 
gradually and as im~erceptibly as possible to accommodate a much wider 
policy of sustained, steadily int ensi~Jing air attacks against North 
Vietnam., at a r ate and on a scale to be determined by the U. S As ,dll 
be discussed further in the next section, that decision 'Has being force-
fully pressed upon the President by his principal advisers immediately 
after FL.AlIDJG Dfu\T I (February , 7). Whether the President had tacitly or 
explicitly accepted this course before FLM~G DART II (February 11), is 
not recorded . 
But it would have been imnortant to him politically in 
any event to play it with a minimum of fu.ama and to preserve ma.."{imum 
flexibility. It seemed sensible to ma.~e it all appear as a logical 
sequence of almost unavoidable steps, to avoid portraying any single 
move as a ,mtershed or any single decision as irreversible. 
The 
Fepruary 11 strikes did constitute a much sharper break with past policy 
than any previous US action in VietnB-'t11; they set the stage for the con-
tLYJ.uing bombing program that was nO'IT to be launched in earnest; but they 
were presented and discussed publicly in very muted tones. 
Some of the President's private comments on the attacks are 
reported by one of his more perceptive biographers, Philip Geyelin, 
in the follovring terms : 
His discus sion of the first t'iV'O retaliatory attacks, follOi'T-
ing Pleiku and Qui Nhon, vlaS almost offhand. 
To one visitor, he 
lampooned the 'crisis' tones of the television broadcasters, the 
, long faces, 2nd the grim taL~ of big, black limousines assembled 
for weightly policy-naJ:ing. 
They woke us up in the middle of the night , and vTe 1'lOke 
them up in the middle' of the night. 
Then they did it again, 
and ~le did it again, 
'tTaS the \lay he des~rib ed it. If he sus-
pected he was on the front edge of a me.jor plunge into a fair-
sized ground var in As i a, he hid his concern masterfully, dis-
missing all the excite.rilent as the sort of thing that happens 
periodic8.11y . 
28 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Geyelin gives the President very high marks for his performance : 
••• his handling of Vietnam in the early months of 1965 was 
more t han just skillful, it 1-TaS a triumph of international and 
domestic politics. 
For if one accepts the need to right the 
'e~uilibrium,
' 
~hen it caQnot be denied that Lyndon Johnson 
moved to do so YTith a bare minimum of' dissent at home and less 
forei gn opposition than might have been expected . 
And he did 
it, at l east for a good many months, YTi thout giving the Corrunu-
nist Chinese or the Russians provocation in such intolerable 
degree that they felt obliged to move in any drastic way to the 
defense of Hanoi . 
~ 
E. 
Reactions at Home and Abroad 
Official and public reactions to the retaliatory strikes w'ere 
f'ai r l y predictable. 
In the U. S. , as Ne'vs\',eek put it, the decision 
Tltouched off ,a vrave of national concern and i nternational jitters 
une~ualled since the US-Soviet confrontation over the Cuban missile 
build- up'. TI 46/ 
Much of the US press expressed serious doubts about 
where the US was heading in Vietnam. 
A great majority of the nation 's 
newspapers regarded the strike s as necessary and justified and the' 
notion that Pleiku "Tas a deliberate VC nrovocation W8,S i'Tidely accepted . 
But many admitted to confusion as to j~t '-That U.S. policy in Vietnam 
w'as; ( e . g., Kansas City Star: 
"Do 've have a specific, unwavering policy 
or are we mprovising from crisis to crisis?TI st. Louis Post-Dispatch: 
TlA strike for strike strategy •.• vTithout any ultimate objective except t o 
hang on in Vietnam~ is not much of a policy. II 
Ne"l'T York Times (James 
Reston): 
''We do not kn01/l ""hat the President has in mind .•• For the moment 
we seem to be standing mute in Washington, paralyzed before a great 
issue and merely digging our thought deeper into the accustomed military 
rut.") 
In Western Europe reactions were less uniform. 
To t he dismay 
of leftist members of his own Labor Party, the U. K. 's Harold Wilson 
phoned a message of solid support to President Johnson. 
Hor eover , t he 
, London Economist saw the bombing as part of a drama acted out for the 
benefit of Hr . Kosygin as a 1farning to all communist countries "that 
t here ?ore l imits beyond vThich t he Viet Cong cannot push things in the 
Sout h without bringing dmm American r eprisals on 'the North. 
There is 
no call to specify exactl y ,vhat these l imits are ; but to make it clear 
that they exist , the shot across Mr . Kosygin ' s bOH was essential." 47/ 
By contrast, de'Gaulle issued a cool statement that the Southeast Asia 
crisis "cannot be settled by force of arms" and called again for a ne,,'r 
Geneva 'Conference to end the war -- a recommendation that "I-TaS echoed by 
India 's Prime Mi nister Shastri and U.N. Secretary General U Thant. 
The pro-Western nations in Southeast Asia that live i n t he 
shadow of Co.m:munist China -- Thailand, Halaysia, Tailmn, Australia --
29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
were visibly cheered. 48/ 
In South Vietnam, General Nguyen Khanh pro-
claimed that the VNAF reprisal strLl<e after Pleiku marked "the happiest 
day of my life." 
The most interesting reactions, of course, were those of the 
Bloc countries. 
As predicted in CIA's October 1964 estimate, 49/ the 
reactions of the three principal Communist powers to the limited US repri-
sal strikes were relatively restrained, with both Moscow' and Peking promptly 
and publicly pledging unspecified support and assistance to Hanoi. 
Beneath 
the verbiage of condemnation of the U. S. "provocation," however, there was 
a measure of caution in both pledges. 
Neither r aised the specter of a broad 
conflict or portrayed the U.S. actions as a threat to "world" peace. 
Peking's 
propaganda, though full of bellicosity and bluster, and publiciz-
ing huge anti-U.S. rallies organized in China's major cities, carefully 
avoided . threatening any direct Chinese intervention. 
Thus it warned that, 
if the U. S. spread the flames of vlar to the DRV, "the Vietnamese people 
will, most assuredly, destroy the U.S. aggressors lock, stock, and barrel 
on their m-m soil." 50/ 
The propaganda. line also suggested that only 
actual U. S. invasion of Nort h Vietnam vTOuld precipitate direct Chinese 
intervention in the ';\Tar. 
MOSCOl-l'S response was even more restrained. 
"In the face of U.S. 
actions" the Soviet statement said, the USSR !fwill be forced, together with 
its allies and friends, to t~l<e further measures to safeguard the security 
and strengthen the defense capability of the DRV . 11 
And it added that !fno 
one should doubt that the Soviet people ,\Till fulfill its international 
duty to the fraternal socialist country." 'Like Peking, hmTever , it derided 
U. S. statements that the air strLl<es 1-Tere retaliatory, and Soviet media 
widely publicized international expressions of indignation and popular 
protests in the USSR. 
l'lhile indicating that tlDRV defenses" would be strength- ~ 
ened, some Mosco"T broadcasts took note of grm-ring interest in the United 
States and else"There for a negotiated settlement in Vietnam. W 
Hanoi's voluble, heated propaganda reaction to the air strikes 
pictured the incident as a sequel to previous air a..n.d naval "provocations" 
against the DRV rather than as a move 1-Thich essentially altered either 
America's or North Vietnam's positions in the conflict. 
DRV propaganda 
hailed the !fheroic exploit 11 of the anti aircraft 1Ll1i ts and claimed that, 
in the first r aid, 12 planes I'Tere downed. 
Officially , Hanoi r esponded in a more carefully worded fashion. 
A Defense l<:inistry statement on the 7th 1-Tarned that the United States 
must "bear the responsibility" for the Ilconsequences" of its "aggression" 
and demanded an E;nd to Ilprovocative and war-seeking acts against the DRV 
and the aggressjve war in South Vietnam." 
Imrlying that the air raid 'S 
1-TOuld not deter future rebel aggression in the South, the DRV Government 
declared that "the Vietna..mese people vTill never shrink before any thre?-t 
of the United States" ~l1d ,;.;rill "further increase their forces and step 
up their struggle." 
The Viet Cong 's Liberation Radio on'the 8th pro-
tested the air raids a..l1d said they had "heightened the determination of 
our people throughout the country to fight and "lin." '2JJ 
30 
TOP SECREI' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Vo 
TlSUST.AINED REPRISAL" ./I1ill ITS VARIANTS -- AJJVOCACY SHInS INTO HIGH GEAR 
A. 
The McGeorge Bundy Recommendation 
Pleiku, and the first FLAMI1\[G DART n.:prisal, caught the McGeorge 
Bundy group (,{hich also included Assistant Secretary of Defense John 
McNp,ughton, ~fhite Hou13e Aide Chester Cooper, and Chairman of the Vietnam 
Coordinating Group Leonard Unger) in the midst of intensive discussions 
with the US Hission in Saigon. 
These discussions covered the whole range 
of US-Vietnam policy options, particularly the complex issue of future 
pressures on the North. 
Immediately follOl{ing the reprisal decision of 
February 7, the group returned to v-Tashington via Air Force One. 
Enroute 
and airborne, they drafted a memorandum to the President "'i-Thich was intended 
to reflect in some degree the consensus reached among the Bundy group and 
with the U. S. Mission in Saigon. 2]) 
But in an umnistakable ,'lay, the memo-
randum also represents a highly personal BQndy assessment and point of 
view. 
For this reason, and because of its unique articulation of a 
rationale for the ROLLllJG TffrnIDER policy, it is reproduced here in con-
siderable detail. 
The Summary Conclusions, presented at the very outset of the 
memorandum, set the tone of the more detailed elaboration that is to 
follow: 
The situation in Vietnem is deteriorating, and vTithout new 
U.S. action defeat appears inevitable -- probably not in a 
matter of weeks or perhaps even months, but within the next 
year or so. 
There is still time to turn it around, but not 
much. 
The stakes in Vietnam are extremely high. 
The American 
investment is very large, and American responsibility is a 
fact of life which i s palpable in the atmosphere of Asia, and 
even else''lhere. 
The international prestige of the United 
States, ~nd a substantial part of our influence , are directly 
at risk in Vietnam. 
There is no way of unloading the burden 
on the Vietnamese themselves, ~nd there is no way of negotiat-
ing ourselves out of Vietnam vJhich offers ~ny serious promise 
at present. It is possible that at some future time a neutral 
non-Communist force may emerge, perhaps Qnder Buddhist leader-
ship, but no such force currently exists, and any negotiated 
U. S. withdrai'lal today ~rould mean surrender on the installment 
plan. 
The policy of graduated ~nd continuing reprisal outlined 
in ArLnex A is the most promising course available, in my 
judgment . 
That judgment i s shared by all who accompanied me 
from \vashington, ' and I think · by all members of the country 
team. 
31 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The events of the last twenty-four hours have produced a 
practicable point of departure for this policy of reprisal, 
and for the remo-.,ral of U.S. dependents •. They may also have 
catalyzed the formation of a new Vietnamese government. If so, 
the situation may be at a turning pOint. 
There is m~ch that can and should be done to support and 
to supplement our present effort, while adding sustained repri-
sals. But I "Tant to stress one important general conclusion Ylhich 
again is shared by all members of my party: 
the U.S. mission is 
composed of outstanding men, and U.S. policy within Vietnam is 
mainly right and ,vell directed. 
None of the special solutions 
or criticisms put fonvard "lith zeal by individual reformers in 
government or in the press is of major importance, and many of 
them are flatly I-ITong. 
No man is perfect, and not every tactical 
step of recent months has been perfectly chosen, but when you 
described the Americ~~s in Vietnam as your first team, you were 
right. 
After a brief description of the general situation in Vietnam as 
the Bundy group found it, the memorandum explains the crucial question of 
whether and to what degree a stable government is a necessity for the 
successful prosecution. of U. S. policy in Vietnam. It is yTel1 to bear in 
mind that the achievement of considerable government stability had been 
made, in all previous "pressure guidance, " a sine qua non pf any transi-
tion to Phase II action against the North . 
And yet GVN stability con-
tinued to be a most elusive goal. Bundy nOlV' seemed to be arguing that 
the U.S. may have been insisting on a more perfect government than was 
really necessary, at least in the short run: 
For immediate purposes -- and especially for the initia-
tion of reprisal policy, we believe that the government need 
be no stronger than it is today with General Khanh as the focus 
of raw pOl·Ter while a ;leak caretaker government goes through the 
motions. 
Such a government can execute military decisions and 
it can give formal political support to joint US/GVN policy. 
That is about all it can do. 
In the longer run, it is necessary that a government be 
established \'Thichwill in one l-ray or another be able to main-
tain its political authority against all chall~nges over a 
longer tliue than the governments of the l ast year and a half. 
The composition and direction of such a government is a 
most difficult problem, and we do not wholly agree with the 
mission in our estimate of its nature. 
The mood of the mission "lith respect to the prospect of 
obtaining such a government is one of pessimism and frustra -
tion . 
This is only natural in t e :L!;1S of the events of the past 
many weeks ••• 
32 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensi ti ve 
·Specifically, we believe that General Khanh, with all his 
faults, is by long odds the outstanding military man currently 
in sight -- and the most impressive personality generally. 
We 
do not share the conclusion of Ambassador Taylor that he must 
somehow be removed from the military and political scene. 
There are strong reasons for the Ambassador's total lack 
of confidence in Khanh. 
At least twice Khanh has acted in ways 
that directly spoiled Ambassador Taylor's high hopes for Decem-
ber.When he abolished the High National Council he undercut 
the prospect of the stable government ~eeded for Phase II action 
against the North. 
In January he overthrew Huang just when the 
. latter , in the Embassy's view, was about to succeed in putting 
the bonzes in their place ••• 
••• our principal reasons for opposing any sharp break with 
Khanh is that Ive see no one else in sight with anything like his 
ability to combine military authority with some sense of politics. 
Bundy also differed from the Embassy on the necessity of "facing 
down" the Buddhist leaders, believing instead that they shouJ...d be 
"incorporated" into GVN affairs rather than being "confronted. II 
He 
stressed the significance of these differences, but then generously en-
dorsed the Mission's overall relationship to and handling of the GVN. 
Having registered these two immediate and import~nt differ-
ences of emphasis, we should add that in our judgment the mission 
has acted at about the right ;Level of general involvement in the 
problem of Vietnamese government-ma~ing. American advice is sought 
by all elements, and all try to bend it to their own ends. 
The 
mission attempts to keep before all elements the importance of 
stable government, and it quietly presses the value of those who 
are known to be good, solid, able ministerial timber ••• 
... It is important that the mission maintain a constant and 
active concern with the politics of government-ma.king . 
This it 
is dOing. 
Bundy then went on to pay obeisance to the need for a stronger 
pacification program and for greater recognition that the Vietnamese need 
"a sense of positive hope": 
If we suppose that neiv hopes are raised -- at least tem-
porarily -~ by a reprisal program and we support further 
. 
, 
that a government somewhat better than the bare minimum is 
established, the most urgent order of business will then be 
the improvement and broadening of the pacification program, 
especially in its non-military elements ••• 
• • • Vietnamese talk is full of the need for 'revolution.' 
Vietnamese practice is empty of action to match the talk 
33 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
sO' much sO' that the wcrd frevcluticnf scmetimes seems to' have 
nO' real meaning. 
Yet in fact there is plainly a deep and 
strcng yearning amcng the yCQDg and the unprivileged fcr a 
new and better sccial crder. 
This is what the Buddhist 
leaders are grcping toward; this is ,.;hat the students and 
young Turk generals are seeking. 
This yearning dces not find 
an adequate response in American pclicy as Vietnamese see it. 
This is one cause of latent anti-American feeling. 
We cnly 
perceived this prcblem toward the end cf cur visit. 
We think 
it needs urgent further attenticn. 
We make nO' present reccm-
mendations. 
We do believe that over the long pull cur military 
and political firmness must be matched by our political and eco-
ncmic support for the hcpes that are embcdied to' Vietnamese in 
the wcrd frevcluticn.' 
Bundy harbor·ed no illusions concerning the enemy's abilit;y .and 
determination: 
The prospect in Vietnam is grim. 
The energy and persis-
tence of the Viet Cong are astonishing . 
They can appear 
anywhere -- and at almost any time. 
They have accepted extra-
ordinary lcsses and they come back for more . 
They show skill 
in their snea..'k: att acks and ferocity Ivhen cornered . 
Yet the 
weary country does not want them to I{in. 
There are a host 'of things the Vietnamese need to de 
better and areas in ,·rhich 'tfe need to help them. 
The pla~e 
where we can help mcst is in the clarity and firrrilless of cur 
cwncommi tment to 1tlhat is in fact as well as in rhetoric a 
COlI'Illon cause. 
Finally, Bundy explained the central rationale of his recomrnen-
dations: 
There is one grave weakness in our posture in Vietnam 
which is within our mill pmver to fix -- and that is a wide-
spread belief that lie dO' not have the will and force aild 
patience an determination to take the necessary action and 
stay the course. 
This is the overriding reason for our present reccmmen-
dation of a policy of sustained reprisal. 
Once such a pclicy 
is put in force, we shall be able to sneak. in Vietnam on many 
topics and in many ways, ',lith growing force and effectiveness. 
'One final ,'lOrd . 
At its very best the struggle in Vietnam 
will be long. It seems' to us important that this flli~damental 
fact be made clear and our understanding of it be ~ade clear 
34 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
to our ovm people and to the people of Vietnam. 
Too often in 
the past we have conveyed the impression that we expect an 
early solution when those who live with this war know that no 
early solution. is possible. It is our mm belief that the 
people of the United States have the nec~ssary will to accept 
and t o execute a policy that rests upon the reality that there 
is no short cut 'to success in South Vietnam. II 
Appended to the Bundy memorandum as Annex A is a detailed, cru'e-
fully formulated explanation of his IIsustained reprisatll policy, including 
specific action recOID~endations. Because of its explicitness and clarity, 
it is reproduced in full: 
IIA POLICY OF SUSTAINED REPRISAL 
III. 
Introductory 
'We believe that the best available way of increasing our chance of 
success in Vietnam is the develo~nent and execution of a policy of 
'sustained reprisal against North Vietna."U -- a policy in vrhich air and 
naval action against the North is justified by and related to the whole 
Viet Cong campaign of violence and terror in the South. 
IIWhile .T,·re believe that the risks of such a policy are acceptable, vIe 
emphasize that its costs are real. It implies significant U. S. air losses 
even if no full air ,{ar is joined, and it seems likely that it would 
eventually require an extensive and costly effort against the whole air 
defense system of North Vietnam. 
U.S. casualties ,olOuld be higher -- and 
more visible to Anlerican feelings -- than those sustained in the struggle 
in South Vietnam. 
IIYet measured against the costs of defeat in Vietnam, this program 
seems cheap. 
And even if it fails to turn the tide -- as it may -- the 
value of the effort seems to us to exceed its cost. 
1111 • 
Outline of the Policy 
Ill. In partnership with the Government of Vietnam, we should develop 
and exercise the option to retaliate against any VC act of violence to 
persons or property. 
"2. In practice , we may 'vish at the outset to relate our reprisals 
to those acts of relatively high visibility such as the Pleiku incident. 
Later, 'ole might retaliate against the assa.ssilation of a province chief, 
but not necessarily the murder of a hamlet official; 'Ie might retaliate 
against a grenade throw'n into a cro'\·rded cafe in Saigon, but not neces-
sarily to a shot fired in a sYllell shop in tile count:;''Yside . . 
"3. 
Once a program of repr:'sals is clearly underway, it should not 
be necessary to connect each specific act agaL"1st. North Vietnam to a 
. 
.' , 
35 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive 
particular outrage in the South. It should be possible, for example, 
to' publish vTeekly lists of outrages in the South and to have it clearly 
understood that these outrages are the cause of such action against the 
North as may be occurring in the current period. 
Such a more generalized 
pattern of reprisal would remove much 'of the difficulty involved in find-
ing precis.ely matchi:qg targets in response to specific atrocities. 
Even 
in such a more general pattern, hmTever, it would be important to insure , 
that the general level of reprisal' action remained in close correspondence 
with the level of outrages in the South. 
We must k~ep it clear at every 
stage both to Hanoi and to the world, that our reprisals vTill be reduced 
or stopped 1V'hen outrages in the South are reduced or stopped -- and that 
we are not attempting to destroy or conquer North Vietnam. 
114. 
t 
t 
In he early stages of such a course, v1e should take he appro-
priate occasion to make clear our firm intent to undertake reprisals on 
any further acts, major or minor, that appear to us and the GVN as 
indicating Hanoi's support. 
We would announce that our tlvo governments 
have been patient and forebearing in the hope that Hanoi would come to 
its senses without the necessity of our having to take further action; 
but the outrages continue and nO,\-T "vV'e must react against those who are 
responsible; we will not provoke; "vV'e will not use our force indiscrimi-
nately; but we can no longer sit by in the face of repeated acts of terror 
and violence for which the DRV is responsible. 
115. 
Having once made this announcement, '\ve should exe cute our re-
prisal policy 'Ivith as 10Tl1 a level of public noise as possible . 
It is to 
our interest that our acts should be seen -- but '\'Te do not wish to boast 
about them in ways that ma.'k.e it hard for Hanoi to shift its ground . 
vie 
should instead direct maximum attention to the continuing acts of violence 
which are the cause of our continuing reprisals. 
116. 
This reprisal policy should begin at a 1mV' level. Its level of 
force and pressure should be increased only gradually -- and as indicated 
above it should be decreased if VC' terror visibly decreases. 
The object 
would not be to lI'\vin" an air war against Hanoi, but rather to influence 
the cou~se of the struggle in the South. 
117. 
At the same time it should be recog..l1ized that in order to main-
tain the pO'\<Ter of reprisal 'Ivithout risk of excessive loss, an "air war!! 
may in fact be necessary . 
~{e should therefore be ready to develop a 
separate justification for energetic flak suppression and if necessary 
for the destruction of Communist air power. 
The essence of such an 
explanation shoUld be that these actions are intended solely to insure 
. the effectiveness of a policy of reprisal, and in no sense represent 
any intent to ,rage offensive war against the North. 
These distinctions 
should pot be difficult to develop . 
!!8. It remains quite possible, however, that this reprisal pOlicy 
would get us quickly into the level of military activity contemplated in 
the so-called Phase II of our December planning. It may even get us 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
beyond this level with Hanoi ~Dd Peiping, if there is a Communist counter-
action. 
We and the GVN should also be prepared for a spurt of VC terror-
is.m, especially in urban areas, that would dwarf anything yet experienced. 
These are the risks of any action. 
They should be carefully reviewed --
but we believe them to be acceptable . 
"9. 
We are convinced that the political values of reprisal require 
a continuous operation. 
Episodic responses geared on a one-for-one basis 
to If spectacular:! outrages ~vould lack the persuasive force of sustained 
pressure. 
More important still, they would leave it· open to the Communists 
to avoid reprisals entirely by giving up only a small element of their 
own progrem.. 
The Gulf of Tonkin affair :produced a sharp upturn in morale 
in South Vietnam. 
When it remained an isolated episode, hmrever, there 
-' 
was a severe relapse. It is the great merit of the proposed scheme that 
to stop it the Communists 1,vould have to stop enough of their activity in 
the South to permit the probable success of a determined pacification 
effort. 
!lIII. 
Expected Effect of Sustained Reprisal Policy 
"1. 
We emphasize that our primary target in ad:vocating a reprisal 
policy is the improvement of the situation in South Vietnam. 
Action 
against the l'iorth is usually urged as a means of affecting the vTill of 
Hanoi to direct and support the VC. 
'I'le consider this an important but 
longer-range purpose . 
The immediate and critical t argets are in the 
South -- in the minds of the South Vietnamese and in the minds of the 
Viet Cong cadres. 
"2. 
Predictions of the effect of any given course of action upon 
the states of mind of people are difficult. It seems very clear that 
if the United States and the Gover~~ent of Vietnam join in a policy of 
reprisal, there will be a sharp immediate increase in optimism in the 
South, among nearly all articulate groups~ The Miss ion believes and our 
ovm conversations confirm -- that in all sectors of Vietnamese opinion 
there is a strong belief that the United States could do much mere if it 
would, and that they are suspicious of our failure to use more of our 
obviously enormous power. 
At least in the short run, the reaction to 
reprisal policy 'Ivould be very favorable. 
"3. 
This favorabl reaction should offer opportunity for increas~d 
American influence in pressing for a more effective. government -- at 
least in the short run. Joint r eprisals would imply military planning 
in 'ilhich the .A~erican role 'llOuld necessarily be controlling, and this 
new relation sh")uld add to our bargaining pm·rer in other military efforts 
-- and conceivably on a vTiderylane as well if a more stable government 
is formed. 
We have the Ilhip h~Dd in reprisals as we do not in other 
fields. 
"4. 
The Vietna.mese increase in hope could "lell increase the readi-
ness of Vietnamese factions themselves to join together in forming a 
more effective government • 
37 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"5. 
We think it plausible that effective and sustained reprisals, 
even ina low key, would have a sUbstantial depressing effect upon the 
morale of Viet Cong cadres in South Vietnam. 
This is the strong 
opinion of CIA Saigon. It is based upon reliable reports of the .ini tial 
Viet Cong reaction to the Gulf of Tonkin episode, and also upon the 
solid general as~essment that the determinaticn of Hanoi and the apparent 
timidity of the mighty United States are both major items in Viet Cong 
confidence. 
"6. 
The long-run effect of reprisals in the South is far less clear. 
It may be that like other stilnulants, the value of this one 'would decline 
over time. 
Indeed the risk of this result is large enough so that we 
ourselves believe that a very major effort all along the line should be 
made in South Vietnam to take full advantage of the immediate stimulus of 
reprisal policy in its early stages. 
Our object should be to use this 
new policy to effect a visible upward turn in pacification, in govern-
mental effectiveness, in operations against the Viet Cong, and in the 
whole US/GVN relationship. It is changes in these areas that can have 
enduring long-term effects. 
~ 
"7. While emphasizing the· importance of reprisals in the South, we 
do not exclude the impact on Hanoi. 
We believe, indeed, that it is of 
great importance that the level of reprisal be adjusted rapidly and 
visibly to both upward and dOlm"'/"ard shifts in the l evel of Viet Cong 
offenses. He )Tant to keep before Hanoi the carrot of our desisting as 
well as the stick of continued pressure. 
We also need to conduct the 
a;pplication of the force so that there is all-rays a prospect of vlOrse to 
come. 
"8. We cannot assert that a policy of sustained reprisal I·TiII succeed 
in changing the course of the contest in Vie tnam.. 
It may fail, and VoTe 
cannot estimate the odds of success with any accuracy -- they may be 
somewhere bet-;·,een 25% and 75%. 
~7hat ,ve can say is that even if it fails, 
the policy will be worth it. At a minimum. it will damp dOlm the charge 
that ,'le did not do all that 'lye could have done, and this charge will be 
important in many countries, including our o,m. 
Beyond that, a reprisal 
policy -- to the extent that it demonstrates U.S. ,yillingness to employ 
this ne',.". norm in counter-insurgency -- ,-.rill set a higher price for the 
future upon all adventures of guerrilla vrarfare , and it shoul? therefore 
some)That increase our ability to deter such adventures . 
We must recogni ze, 
however, that that ability will be gravely vleakened if there is failure 
for ~~y reason in Vietnam. 
"IV. Present Action Recommendations 
"1. 
This general recommendation was developed in intensive discus-
sions in the days just before the attacks on Pleiku. 
These attacks and 
cur reaction to them have created an ideal opportunity for the prompt 
development and execution of sustained reprisals . 
Conversely, if no such 
38 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
policy is nm" developed, we face the grave danger that Pleiku, like the 
Gulf of Tonkin, may be a short-run st:ilnulant and a long-term depressant. 
We therefore recommend that the necessary preparations be made for con-
tinuing reprisals. 
The major necessary steps to be taken appear to us 
to be the following: 
"(1) 
t 
We sho~d complete the evacuation of dependen s. 
"(2) 
We should quietly start the necessary vTestward deploy-
ments of back-up contingency forces. 
~3) We should develop and refine a running catalogue of Viet 
Cong offenses which can be published regularly and related clearly to 
our own reprisals. 
Such a catalogue should perhaps build on the founda-
tion of an initial White Paper. 
"(4) 
We -should initiate joint planning with the GVN on both the 
civil and military level. 
Specifically, we should give a clear and 
strong signal to those now' forming a government that we will be ready 
for this policy when they are. 
~ 
"(5) 
~\le should develop the necessary public and diplomatic state-
ments to accompany the initiation and continuation of this program. 
"(6) 
He should insure that a reprisal progra.m is matched 
renewed public commitment to our family of progr ams in the South, 
that the central importance of the southern struggle may never be 
lected. 
by 
so 
neg-
"(7) 
vie should plan quiet diplomatic communi cations of the 
precise meaning of w'hat we are and are not doing, to Hanoi, to Peking 
and to Moscow. 
"(8) 
We should be prepared to defend and to justify this new' 
policy by concentrating attention :in every forum upon its c'ause -- the 
aggression in the South . 
. 1 (9) 
We should accept discussion on these terms in any forum, 
but vle should not nmv accept the idea of negotiations of w.:y sort except 
on the basis of a stand down of Viet Cong violence. 
A program of sus-. 
tained reprisal, with its direct link to Hanoi's continuing aggressive 
actions in the South will not involve us in nearly the level of inter-
national recrimination which would be precipitated by a gO-North program 
which "las not so' connected. 
For this re'3.son the international pressures 
for negotiation should be quite manageable." 
B. 
The Taylor Conception of "Graduated Reprisals" 
At about the same time that the McGeorge Bundy memorandum was 
being submitted to the President, Ambassador Taylor, in a cable from 
39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Saigon, ~ conveyed his own views concerning a future reprisal program 
to Washington. 
Not surprisingly, (since they had exchanged ideas ex-
tensively in Saigon) Taylor's concept closely paralleled Bundy's in many 
of its features. 
But in at least one 
significant respect it diverged 
.sharply. Whereas Bundy's main objective was to influence the course of 
the struggle in the South (providing a boost to GVN morale and cohesion, 
affording an opportunjty for increased American influence upon and bar-
gaining pO¥Ter with the GVN, and exerting a depressing effect upon VC 
c3.dres), Taylor's principal aim was "to bring increasing pressure on the 
DRV to cease its intervention." 
The areas of agreement between Taylor and Bundy ¥Tere considerable. 
Like Bundy, he reconnnended Ira measured, controlled sequence of actions 
against the DRV taken in reprisal for DRV-inspired actions in South 
Vietnam... 
• •• carried out jointly with the GVN and ••• directed solely 
against DRV military targets and infiltration routes ••. " 
The reprisals 
could be "initiated on the basis of a general catalogue or package of 
VC outrages, no one particularly grave itself .•. ~ and could be varied 
"with the general level of VC outrages in SVN .or, if we so desired, 
progressively raised ..•. Thus it would be tantamolmt to the so-called 
Phase II escalation, but justified on the basis of retaliation." Like 
Bundy, he believed "that we should limit US/GVN publicity to the bare 
minimillll .•• " and he also cautioned that '\,re should attempt to avoid in 
the present situation a general letdown in morale and spirit which 
followed our action in the Ton..."k.in Gulf. II 
But Taylor's concept ioTas much more directly aimed at- bringing pres-
sures to bear against the DRV, to give them. IIserious doubts as to their 
chances for ultimate success" and to cause them to cease their aggression 
and to accede to a 'rigorously enforced 1954/1962 Geneva-type settlement. 221 
It Ivas this focus on the North, r at ~1.er than a rededication of the GVN to 
the struggle in the South, that Taylor considered to be the real benefit 
of a reprisal policy:--iDtegrating the Vietnamese in a program against 
the DRV, he believed, would have an exhilarating effect which, if exploited 
early "coul:'!. lead tc a greater sense of purpose and direction both in the 
government .Lnd the military and awaken new hOlle for eventual victory on 
the part of the Vietnamese people. II 
In a subsequent cable, 56/ Taylor spelled out his "graduated reprisal'~ 
concept in a more orderly fashion: 
--In revie>v- of the rationale for concept of graduated repris-
als we are of the opinion that, in order of importance, it should 
have the follovTing objectives: 
(a) 
The ,.Jill of Hanoi leaders; 
(b) 
GVN morale; and 
(c) 
Physical damage to installations p~ving some bearing on 
the DRV ability to s1.:pport VC. 
40 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Of these three, first appears to us by far the most important, 
since our effectiveness in influencing Hanoi leadership w'ill, 
in the long run, determine the success or failure of our 
efforts in both North and South Vietnam. 
Second objective, 
effect on eVN morale, is also important rnd fortunately the 
requirements for building morale in the South are roughly the 
same as those fo~ impressing Hanoi leaders ~dth the rising 
costs of their support of the VC. 
In this case, what is bad 
for Hanoi is generally good for Saigon. 
Effect of the physical destruction of material objects and 
infliction of casualties vrill not, in our judgment, have a 
decisive bearing upon the ability of DRV to support VC. 
HOI-rever, 
degree of damage and number of casualties inflicted gauge the 
impact of our operations on Hanoi leadership and hence are im-
portant as a measure of their discomfort . 
... We should keep our response actions controllable and 
optional to maximum degree possible so that we can act or 
wi thhold action vThen and as ,ve choose. 
This need for flexi-
bility argues strongly for vagueness in defining criteria for 
situations justifying retaliat ion and for retention of freedom · 
of action to make ad hoc decisions in light of our. interests at 
the moment. 
But in any case, complete flexibility ,vill not be 
possible ••• 
Assuming that we have achieved control and flexibility, we 
wi::"l then need to think of the tempo vrhich vTe wish to communi-
cate to the retali atory program, ,vi th primary consideration 
given to effect of the program on Hanoi lee.dership. It seems 
clear to us that there should be a gradual, orchestrated accele-
ration of t empo measured in terms of frequency, size, number 
and/or geographical locat ion of the reprisal strikes and of 
related activities such as BARREL ROLL and 34-A. 
An upward 
trend in any or all of these forms of intensity will convey 
signals which, in combination, should present to the DRV leaders 
a vision of inevitable, ult imate destruction if they do not change 
their ways. 
The exact r ate of acceleration is a matter of judg-
ment but vTe consider, roughly speaking, that each successive week 
should include some new act on our part to increase pressure on 
Hanoi •.. 
We do not believe that our reprisal program will lead the 
GVIiI to bel~ eve that v.'e have taken over their war and that they 
can reduce their anti-VC activities . 
~-Je hope that the opposite 
vTill be the effect a..nd the retaliatory actions in the North "Till 
give impulsion to t~1.e defensi ve efforts in the South. 
HO'i.'Iever, 
the Dept I s fear can certainly not be ruled out and ,ve shall watch 
closely the GVI~' readion to the program as it unfolds." 
41 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
One of Ambassador Taylor's major concerns was that, if a graduated 
reprisals program were adopted, it ,vould be necessary to begin discus-
sions with the GVDT to seek agreement on mutually acceptable terms for 
the ultimate settlement of the conflict. Taylor thought of this 'as a 
·process of education by 'which he would guide the GVN towards formulat-
ing a "frame'vork of demands to be made on the DRV as well as the general 
negotiating procedure"s. II 
He outlined his Droposed "terms for cessation 
of our reprisal attacks" as follows: 57/ 
~ 
-
1. 
DRV return to strict observance of 1954 accords 
with respect SVN and the 1962 agreement 'i'Tith respect to Laos 
-- that is, stop infiltration, and bring about a cessation of 
VC armed insurgency. 
(With respect to Laos strictly observe 
the 1962 accords ,'lith respect to Laos, including the with-
drawal of all Viet Minh forces and personnel from Laos and 
recognize that the freedom of mOl ement granted therein in Laos 
under those accords is not subject to veto or interference by 
any of the parties in Laos .) 
B. 
In return and subject in each instance to a judgment 
that DRV is complying faithfully and effectively: 
1. 
U. S. will return to 1954 accords vTith respect to 
military personnel in SVN and Gm~ would be willing to enter 
into trade talks looking toward normalization of economic 
relations between DRV and GVN. 
2. 
Subject to f aithful compliances by DRV with 1954 
accords, ' U. S. and GVN l"Tould give assurances that they would not 
use force or support the use of force by any other party to 
upset the accords with respect to the DRV. 
3. 
Within the framework of the 1954 accords, the GVN 
would permit VC desiring to do so to return to the DRV without 
their arms and ,YOuld grant amnesty to those peacefully laying 
doWn their arms and desiring to remain in SVN. 
C. 
If and when Hanoi indicates its acceptance of foregoing 
conditions, careful consideration must be given to immediate 
. subsequent procedures which will avoid danger of: (a) becoming 
involved in a cease fire vis-a-vis the 
DRV and/or the VC 
accompanied by stru..n.g-out negotiati.ons; (b) making conditions 
so stringent as- to be un'\.vorkable from practical point of view. 
Probably best procedure would be to have the GVN and DRV meet 
in the DMZ at the military level under ICC auspices with U.S. 
observers to reach agreement mechanics of carrying out under-
standLn.g while action against the VC and DRV c~ntinues, at 
42 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
least in principle. 
RLG would have to be associated with these 
negotiations at some point. 
It is evident from these and similar tough settlement terms and 
·cessation !!demanrls!! that "rere being discussed. 1;etween Saigon and \vashing-
ton at that time that there ,vas a real expectation that the kinds of 
reprisal pressures co~templated would inflict such pain or threat of pain 
upon the DRV that it would be compelled to order a stand-down of Viet 
Cong violence and accept conditions that, from their point of view, were 
tantamount to surrender. 
Such a view is even more clearly implicit in 
the comments and proposals on reprisal programs emanating from the U.S. 
military leadership. 
C. 
CINCPAC IS !!Graduated Pressures!! Philosophy 
Admiral Sharp, commenting on Ambassador Taylor's reprisal and 
negotiating concepts, called attention to the need to make the reprisal 
program a very forceful one, if the DRV was to be persuaded to accede to 
a cessation on US terms: 
While it may be politically desirable to speak publicly in 
terms of a !!graduated reprisal!! program, I "Tould hope that we 
are thinking, and will act, in terms of a "graduated pressures!! 
philosophy which has more of a connotation of steady, relentless 
movement toward our objective of convincing Hanoi and Peiping of 
the prohibitive cost of the..'n of their program of subversion, 
insurgency ~Dd aggression in SEAsia. 
If a firm decision is made to embark upon a graduated 
pressures program, the recommendation contained in LTaylor's 
Feb 11 message7 to undertake discussions with the RVN refer-
ence joint US7GVE military actions is most necessary. 
Failure 
to develop firm arrangements concerning roles and responsibili-
ties could result in over reliance on the U.S. contribution 
to the war effort, and perhaps GVN resorting to rash military 
actions from which we would have to bail them out. 
There is no question of the desirability of concurrently 
educating the GVN, as also proposed in Rerb , toward formula-
tion of war objectives, demands and negotiating procedures to 
be employed against the DRV. 
I believe that sueh an educational 
process, combined with a graduated military pressures program 
"rill f'urther contribute to GVN stability. 
We must be certain that 
I'Te are dealing from a posture of 
strength before we sit down at tile bargaining table. 
Success-
ful direct increas ing military pressures against NVN must be 
complemented by a reversal of the trend tOiiard VC success 
within RVN. 
~Je must also exhibit· complete confidence in our 
43 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
<. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
abili ty to lvin in Vietnam and so indicate by our willingness 
to rely on our military superiority if need be. 
We must not be driven to premature discussions with the 
DRV in our eagerness to find a solution to the Southeast 
Asian problem. 
He should continue our military pressures, 
making (our) general objectives publicly known, while awaiting 
some sign that the DRV is ready to ' negotiate to"rards achieve-
ment of those objectives .•• 
••• Finally, any political program which is designed to 
formulate terms and procedures for reaching agreement on 
cessation of a graduated military pressures program, lvill be 
successful in proportion to the effectiveness of the military 
pressures program itself. ~ 
D. 
JCS Eight-Heek Program 
As these discussions continued, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, re-' 
sponding to a McNamara re ques~ of 8 February, sent to the Secretary of 
Defense their recommendations 59/ 
for an initial program of military 
actions against the DRV, extending over a period of eight weeks. 
In 
accordance with McNamara 1s instructions, the program was to be confined 
generally to targets along Route 7 and south of the 19th -parallel, was 
to employ both R~~ and US forces, and w~s to be primarily a plan for air 
strikes. 
Since it ~as so constrained, the JCS program does not fully 
reflect the preferences of the Joint Chiefs. 
But it does reveal some-
thing of their thinking. 
The context in which the program would be 
undertaken is described as follm-Ts: 
It is visualized that the initial overt air strikes of this 
program will have been undertaken as a retaliation in response 
to a provocative act by Viet Cong or DRV forces against US or 
RVN personnel or installations. 
Successive overt operations to 
provide sustained pressures and progressive destruction will be 
continued on the plausible justification of further provocations, 
which on the basis of recent past experience seem quite likely to 
exist. 
As this program continues the realistic need for precise 
event-association in this reprisal context will progressively 
diminish. 
A wide range of activities are within the scope of 
what may be stated to be provocations justifying reprisal. 
The program called for t "l0 to four US-VNAF strikes per "reek, lnl-
tially against t3 .. rgets along Route 7 south of the 19th parallel and near 
the Laos border. 
Specifically, the program was conceived as follOivs: ' 
The air attacks are scheduled for the first eight Iveeks at 
the rate of four fixed targets a week ••• These initial t argets 
are located South of the 19th parallel with th~ exception of 
44 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Target 89, an Armed Route Reconnaissance of Route 7, in the 
DRV close to the Laos border. 
BARREL ROLL missions in Laos' 
will be coordinated with air strikes in the DRV near the Laos 
border to ensure maximum effectiveness. 
a. 
The targets are attacked in t he order of ascending 
risk to attacking forces and are attacked at a frequency that 
assures that continuous and regular pressure is maintained 
against the DRV. 
Authority should be delegated to CINCPAC to 
select alternate )>feather targets from the list of previous ly 
approved targets for the eight .. reeks program. 
Subsequent 
weekly operations would be adjusted as appropriate when alter-
nate targets are attacked. 
b. Airfields north of the 19th parallel are not 
scheduled for attack in the first eight .. reeks . 
However, if, 
during the scheduled attacks in this program, DRV or CHICOM 
aircraft attempt intercept of US/RVN forces, the communist air 
threat involved should be eliminated. 
The program of gradu-
ated pressures would then have reached A. higher scale of esca-
lation and would require reorientation. 
The program also provided for naval gunfire bombardment and for con-
tinuation of already ongoing activity, including 34A operations, resump-
tion of DESOTO Patrols, and authorization for ground cross border 
operations. 
To carry out this program, the JCS "fished to deploy about 325 more 
aircraft to the Western Pacific to deter or cope with any escalation 
that might result .. This \vould include dispatch of 30 B-52 t s to Guam, 
deployment of 9 more USAF tactical fighter squadrons and a fourth air-
craft carrier. 
Some Marine and Army units would go to Thailand, and other 
units would be alerted. 
able: 
As for the risks of escalation, the JCS considered these as manage-
'rhe Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the DRV, Communist 
China, and the Soviet Union will make every effort through pro-
paganda and diplomatic moves to halt the US attacks. 
The DRV 
also will take all actions to defend itself, and open, overt 
aggress ion in South Vietnam and Laos by the DRV might occur. 
In addition, the mere initiation of the ne,·r US policy alJnost 
certainly \v0uld not lead Hanoi to restrain the Viet Cong; 
Hanoi would probably elect to maintain tLe very intense levels 
of activity of the past felv days. 
How'ever, if the United States 
persevered i n the face of threats and international pressUres, 
and as the degree of damage inflicted on North Vietnam increased, 
the chances of a reduction i n Viet Cong activity would rise. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
They further believe that the Chinese communists would be reluc-
tant to become directly involved in the fighting in Southeast 
Asia; however, as the number and severity of US attacks against 
the DRV increase, they probably would feel an increased compul-
sion to take some dramatic action to counter the impact of US 
pressures. 
There is a fair chance that Peiping would introduce 
limited numbers of Chinese ground forces as "volunteers" into 
North Vietnam, ~d/or northern Laos, intending to raise the 
spector of further escalation, to underline its commitment to 
assist the North Vietnamese, and to challenge the Soviets to . 
extend corresponding support. 
They also believe that the probable 
Soviet response to these US courses of action "Tould consist both 
of a vigorous diplomatic and propaganda effort to bring the United 
states to the conference table and the provision of military sup-
port to North Vietnam. 
While the extent and nature of the latter 
are difficult to predict, it alJnost certainly ,-{Quld include anti-
aircraft artillery and radars. 
In order to provide a more effec-
tive defense against the US air attacks, North Vietnam '-{Quld 
probably press for surface-to-air missiles. 
The chances are about 
even that the Soviets "rould agree to provide some SA-2 defenses, 
but they would do so in \Vays calculated to minimize the initial 
risks to them. 
By providing the necessary Soviet personnel in . 
the guise of 'technicians,' the USSR could preserve the option of 
ignoring any Soviet casualties. 
In the event the DRV and Com-
munistChinese openly undertake aggressive actions , the United 
States and its allies can deal with them adequately .••• 
'It is the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the 
program herein proposed will demonstrate to the DRV that con-
tinuation of its direction and support of insurgencies idll lead 
progressively to more serioUB punishment. If the insurgency con-
tinues "Tith active DRY support, strikes against the DRY will be 
extended "lith intensified efforts against targets north of the 
19th parallel. 
While the Joint Chiefs recommended approval of the recommendations, 
not all considered them adequate. 
General McConnell, Air Force Chief of 
Staff, believed that the much heavier air strike recommendations, IDa,de by 
the JCS in late 1964 were more appropriate than the mild actions now 
proposed. 60/ 
General Wheeler backed deployment of more USAF and other 
air units -but pressed for an integrated air program ~gainst the North 's 
transportation system, especially railroads. 
He also believed, along 
yTith General Harold K. Johnson, Army Chief of Staff, that three U. S. 
ground divisions might have to be sent to Southeast Asia . 
The JCS 
chairman directed the Joint Staff to examine the possibility of placing 
one or two of these divisions in northeast Thailand and a third, aug-
mented by allied personnel, south of the demilitarized zone in South 
Vietnam. 
46 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Some of' .these JCS recommendations w'ere quickly accepted, particu-
larly those having to do with Air Force deployments. 
Thus the Adminis-
trationapproved the dispatch, from 11 to 13 February, of' 30 B-58's to 
Guam and 30 KC-135's to Okinawa . 
Designated Arc Light, these bombers 
and tankers of the strategic Air command (SAC; initially were earmarked · 
(though never used) for high-altitude, all-weather bombing of' important 
. targets in the North.- §JJ 
The particular JCS air strike program, on the other haed, wa& never 
adopted. 
The det ailed JCStarget proposals did f'igure prominently in 
the intensive highest-level r eprisal and pressures planning that con-
tinued during the succeeding vieeks and months, but that planning was 
conducted essentially on an ad hoc basis, strike by strike, and did not 
at this stage embrace a multi-week program. 
47 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VI. 
INITIATION OF "ROLLING THl)l'IDER" -- 18 DAYS OF MAl-J-:EUVER AND DELAY 
A. 
The Presidential Decision and Taylor's Response 
The for~al Presidential decision to inaugurate what eventually 
emerged as the ROLLING THUNDER program'ivas made on Sunday, February 13. 
It was reported to Ambassador Taylor in a NODIS cable 62/ drafted in 
the White House and transmitted to Saigon late that afternoon. 
The fUll 
text of the message follows: 
. ·.rhe President today approved the follo,ving program for 
ilnmediate future actions in follmv-up decision he reported to 
you in Deptel 1653. 
LThe first F~UJ~G DART reprisal decision~ 
l. We will intensify by all available means the program of 
pacification ,vithin SVN. 
2. 
"\-Te will execute a program of measured and limited air 
action jointly with GVN against selected military targets in 
DRV remaining south of 19th parallel until further notice. 
FYI. 
Our current expectation is that these attacks might come 
about once or twice a week and involve tyro or three targets on 
each day of oper ation . 
END FYI~ 
3. 
We will announce this policy of measured action in 
generat terms and at the same time, we 1vill go to UN Security 
Council to make clear case that aggressor is Hanoi. 
We vrill 
~lso ma.l.ce it plain that 1·re are ready and eager for 'talks' to 
bring aggression to an end. 
4. 
We believe this 3-part program must be concerted with 
GVN, and vle currently expect to annOll..'1ce it by Presidential 
statement directly after next .authorized air action. 
We believe 
this action should tal<;:e place as early as pos sible next week. 
5. 
You are: accordingly instructed to seek ilnmediate GVN 
agreement on this program. 
You are authorized to emphasize our 
conviction that announcement of readiness to talk is stronger 
diplomatic position than awaiting inevitable summons to Security 
Council by t hird rarties. 
He vTould hope to have appropr iate GVN 
concurrence by Monday ffeb 14tE7 if possible here. 
In prefenting above to GVN, yon shouJ..d dra1v fully, as you 
see fit, on rollmving arguments : 
a. 
We are determined to continue with military actions 
regardless of Security Council deliberations and any 'talks' or 
negotiations that may ensue, unless and. until Hanoi has brought 
48 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
its aggression to an end. 
Our demand "''lould be that they cease 
infiltration and a~l forms of support and also the activity 
they are directing. in the south. 
b. ''le consider the UN Security Council initiative, 
follm'ling another strL"k.e, essential if we are to avoid being 
faced with really damaging initiatives by the USSR or perhaps 
by such powers as India, France, or even the UN. 
c. 
At an early point in the UN Security Council initia-
tive, we would expect to see calls for the DRV to appear in the 
UN. 
If they failed to appear, as in August, this will make 
doubly clear that it is they ,vho are refusing to desist, and 
our position in pursuing military actions again~t the DRV would 
be strengthened. 
For same reason we would now hope GVN itself 
would appear at UN and vTork closely with US. 
d. 
vJith or 'i-rithout Hanoi, we have every expectation that 
any 'talks' that may result from our Security Council initiative · 
would in fact go on for many weeks or perhaps months and would 
above all focus constantiy on the cessation of Hanoi's aggression 
as the precondition to any cessation of military action against 
the DRV. 
He further anticipate that any detailed discussions 
about any yossible eventual form of agreement returning to the 
essentials of the 1954 Accords 1wuld be postponed and would be 
subordinated to the central issue. 
For your private guidance, the follmdng draft language is 
under consideration for Presidential announcement: 
BEGIN Q,UOTE: 
The aggression has continued. It has continued against the 
Vietnamese, and it has continued against Americans. 
In support 
of the independence of Vietnam, in the service of our nation, 
and in fulfillment of the solemn public obligation of our nation, 
and in our individual and collective self-defense, the Govern-
ment of the United States, with the Government of Vietnam, has 
nmv decided that further action must be taken. 
The actions we have agreed upon are three: 
First and most · important, we "rill continue and will intensify 
still further our campaign agai nst terror and violence in South 
Vietnam itself. 
The establishment of civil peace and the disarm-
ing of the Connnunis t forces are the first order of business for 
both our Governments. 
Our military and police actions will be 
increasingly energetic and effective. 
vie idll also strengthen 
and enlarge our efforts to move forward with the peaceful de-
velopment of a society set free from fear. 
He· will never make 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the mistake O'f assuming that there is any substitute fO'r victO'ry 
against aggression where it shmvs its open face -- inside the 
bO'rders O'f SO'uth Vietnam itself. 
SecO'nd 
and at the same time -- we will carry O'ut measured 
but effective actions against military targets in NO'rth Vietnam. 
These actions wi'll be repO'rted to' the United Nations . Security 
CO'uncil under the Provisions O'f Article 51 of the United NatiO'ns 
Charter -- and each such repO'rt will include a full account of 
the continuing acts O'f aggressiO'n 'l-lhich make O'ur actions neces-
sary. 
These actiO'ns vrill stop when the aggression stO'Ps. 
Third, we will press with urgency fO'r talks designed to' bring 
an end to the aggression and its threat to peace. 
I have today 
instructed Ambassador stevenson to' seek such action urgently, in 
the Security Council O'f the United Kations , .and if that body 
shO'uld be hamstrung by aDY veto, we shall then press for.talks 
in another apprO'priate forum. 
vIe believe that in any such talks 
the first O'bject must be an end O'f aggressiO'n, and we believe 
that the gO'vernment in Hanoi must be brO'ught to the conference 
room. 
Our cO'rnmon purpose -- and our only purPO'se -- is to' 
restO're the peace and domesti~ tranquility which O'thers have so 
savagely attacked. 
~~ QUOTE 
Several aspects O'f the. message are O'f interest. First, it features· 
intensified pacificatiO'n as the first O'rder O'f business and as a major 
point in the contemplated Presidential annO'uncement. 
This stress on 
actiO'n in the South reflected a serious cO'ncern at high levels in the 
White HO'use and the State Department at that time, that a grmiing pre-
O'ccupatiO'n i-lith action against the NO'rth WO'uld be likely· to' cause the 
US Mission and the GVN leadership to neglect the all-important struggle 
vTithin the borders O'f SO'uth Vietnam. 
SecO'nd, the description of the air 
strike program in the message is extremely cursO'ry, suggesting that the 
President at this time still wished to preserve as much flexibility as r 
PO'ssible concerning the future scO'pe and character of t he prO'gram. 
_~d 
third, the message reveals the President's intentiO'n, as O'f that date, to' 
take the DRV aggression issue and the US bO'mbing response promptly before 
the UN Security Council -- an intention that was drO'Pped several days 
later in favO'r of a quite different approach, namely the UK/USSR 
Co-Chairn:en initiative recounted below. 
In actuality, instead of mO'unt-
ing a majO'r fir approach, the President cO'ntented himself initially with 
a brief public statement 63/ of US O'bjectives in Vietnam, which fO'rmed 
the keynote O'f the official line, and was to' be frequently quO'ted by 
AdministratiO'n cfficials in subsequent ,:eeks : 
As I have said so many, " many times, and O'ther Presidents 
ahead of me have said, our purpose, our objective there is 
clear . 
That purPO'se and that objective is to jO'in in the de-
fens e and protection O'f freedom of a brave peO'ple whO' are 
under attack that is controlled and that is directed frO'm 
outside their country. 
50 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
We have no ambition there for ourselves. 
We seek no 
dominion. 
We seek no conquest. 
We seek no wider war. 
But 
we must all ll..l1derstand that ,.;e "rill persist in the defense 
of freedom and our continuing actions will be those which 
are justifi~d and those that are made necessary by the con-
tinuing aggression of others. 
These actions will be measured and fitting and adequate. 
Our stamina and the stamina of the American people is equal 
to the task. 
Ambassador Taylor received the neVIs of the President's new program . 
with enthusiasm. 
In his response, hOvlever, he explained the difficulties 
he faced in obtaining authentic GVN concurrence "in the condition of 
virtual non-government" which existed in Saigon at that moment. 
The 
Vietnamese Armed Forces Council had arrogated unto itself the authority 
of appointing the Chief of State ~l1d the Pre~ier, and had left him to 
his own devices in trying to form a cabinet. 
Any GVN concurrence that 
Taylor could obtain would have to be a consensus oi a lame-duck acting 
prime minister, a widely mistrusted military commander-in-chief, a prime-
minister-designate vii th ll..l1certain prospects, and assorted other p01trer 
figures in a foundering caretaker government. 
This Alice-in-·Wonderland . 
atmosphere notwithstanding, Taylor 1vaS undaunted: 
It will be interesting to observe the effect of our pro-
posal on the internal political situation here. 
I will use 
the occasion to emphasize that a dramatic change is occurring 
in U.S. policy, one highly favorable to GVN interests but de-
manding a parallel dramatic ch~l1ge of attitude on the part of 
the GVN. 
No"r is the time to install the best possible govern-
ment as we are clearly approaching a climax in the next fevl 
months. 
The U. S. Mission and the GVN will have serious prob-
lems to work out together, many of them complicated matters in 
the field of foreign affairs vThere the GVN must strengthen its 
professional representation. 
We need the first team and we 
need it fast. 
There is just a chance that the vision of possible victory 
may decide Khanh to take over the government at this juncture. 
Alternately, it may create some measure of national unity which 
will facilitate the task of Quat or of any othe-r Prime Minister 
who succeeds in forming a ne-;-l government .64/ 
Quat's charces for creating national uni+y -- even with the assist 
of an imminent !1dramatic change in US policy" -- vlere slim indeed. 
Quat's 
goverrL1l1ent ,vas the ninth attempt to form a viable structure since the 
overthrow of Diem. 
It was obvious from. the outset that it would. be under 
the domination of the Armed.Forces Council which had publicly declared 
that it would If act as a mediator until the goverrnnent is popularly elected • 
.51 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The mediator himself, hmTever, was to be rent asunder I·ri thin days of 
Quat's assumption of office in one of those explosions that had become 
so typical in Vietnam since Diem's demise. 
That political explo~ion 
was particularly unfortunate in its timing in relation to the "dramatic" 
new ROLLmG T.dtJNIlER program just then set to set under way. 
) 
B. 
ROLLING THlIDi1)ER I is Laid On-.-and Cancelled 
A refinement of the February 13 decision on ROLLING ~~ER, 
including determination of the timing and character of the first air 
strike, >vas evidently made by the President on February 18. 
A NODIS 
cable ~ of that date informed nine American posts in the Far East of 
the decisions in the follmving words: 
. Policy on Viet-Nam adopted today calls for follovTing: 
1. Joint program with GVN of continuing air and naval 
action against North Viet-Nam whenever and wherever necessary. 
Such action to be against selected military targets and to be 
limited and fitting and adequate as response to continuous 
aggression in South Viet-Nam directed in Hanoi. 
Air strikes 
will be jointly planned and agreed 'Ivi th GVN and carried out 
on joint basis. 
2. Intensification by all available means of pacification 
program within South Viet-Kam, including every possible step to 
find and attack VC concentra.tions and headquarters wi thin SVN by 
all conventional means available to GVN and US. 
3. 
Early detailed presentation to nations of world and to 
public of documented case against DRV as aggressor. 
Forum and 
form this presentation not yet decided, but we do not repeat 
not expect to touch upon readiness for talks or negotiations at 
this time. 
He are considering reaffirmation our objectives in 
some · form in near future. 
4. 
Careful public statements of USG, combined with fact of 
continuing air action, are expected to m~~e it clear that mili-
tary action will continue while aggression continues. 
But 
focus of public attention will be kept as far as possible on 
DRV aggression, not on joint GVN/US military operations. 
There _ 
will be no comment of any sort on future actions except that all 
such actions will be adequate and measured and fitting to aggres-
sion. 
(You will have noted President's statement of yesterday, 
which vTe will probablY allmv to stand.) 
Addressees should inform head of government or State (as 
appropriate) of above in strictest confidence and report re-
actions. 
In the case of Canberra and Wellington you may indicate 
vie would be prepared respond to questions through embassies here 
tomorr01:v. 
52 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
tou may indicate that we ,.;ill seek to keep governments 
informed, subject to security considerations, of each opera-
tion as it occurs, as vre did with respect to operations of 
February 7 and 11. 66/ 
Although the cable does not indicate it, the first air action under 
, the new program was set for February 20th. 
Dubbed ROLLIRG T~~ER I, it 
called for US strikes' against Quang Khe Naval Base and concurrent VNAF 
strikes against Vu Con Barr acks, with appropriate weather alternates pro-
vided. 
The above cable was sent from \{ashington at 8:00 p.m. on February 
18th. 
Five hours later, at 1:00 p.m., February 19 (Saigon time), Colonel 
Pham Ngoc Thao, a conspiratorial revolutionary figure who had been active 
in the coup against Diem, began his infamous semi-coup to oust General 
Khanh -.- but not to overthrmr the Armed Forces · Council. 
Aided by General 
Phat, his forces succeeded in occu~ying the JL~VN military headquarters 
and other key government buildings in Saigon, including the radio station. 
Until the coup was defeated and Khan.h' s r esignation submitted some 40 hours 
later, pandemonium reigned in Saigon. 
Ambassador Taylor promptly recom-
mended cancellation of the February 20 air strike and his recommendation 
was equally promptly accepted. 
In a FLASH message to all recipients of 
the cable quoted above, Washington rescinded the instructions to notify 
respective heads of state UIltil further notice "in view' of the disturbed 
situation in Saigon.tr. 67/ 
The "disturbed situation" ,vas not to settle dmm completely for 
almost a "reek. 
Even though the semi-coup failed quickly and the Armed 
Forces Council reasserted its full authority, the AFe continued the anti-
Khanh momentum of the coup-plotters by adopting a "vote of no confidence" 
in Khanh. 
The latter made frantic but unsuccessful efforts to rally his 
supporters. 
Literally running out of gas in Nha Trang shortly before 
dawn on February 21, he submitted his resignation, claiming that a "foreign 
hand" "las behind the coup. 
No one, how'ever, could be (lui te certain that 
Khanh might not lire-coup" once again, unless he ,'rere pby~ica.lly removed 
from the scene. 
This took three more days to accomplish. 
On the after-
noon of February 25, after some mock fare,vell performances designed to 
enable Khanh to save face; he left Vietnam to become an Ambassador-at-
Large. 
At the airport to see him off and to make sure that he vTaS safely 
dispatched from the COQDtry, was Ambassador Taylor, glassily polite. It 
was only then that Taylor ,vas able to issue, and Washington would accept, 
clearance for the long postponed and frequently rescheduled first ROLLD~G 
THUNDER strike. 
C. 
The me/USSR Co-Chairmen Gambit 
Political turbulence in Saigon vTaS not the only reason for delay-
ing the air action. 
Even before the semi-coup broke out, forcing can-
cellation of the February 20 strike, a diplomatic initiative 'Has taken by 
the Soviet Foreign Office in Moscow, that vTas eagerly picked up by London 
and Washington, and that quickly drew attention to the adverse consequences 
that might flm-l from an air strike executed at that very moment, concurrently 
with the diplomatic initiative in question. 
53 
TOP SECRET. - Sensitive 
, , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
On February 17, the UK Ambassador to Washington, Lord Harlech, in-
formed Secretary Rusk that the Soviet Foreign Office had approached the 
British with the suggestion that the UK-USSR Co-Chairmanship of ~he 
1954 Geneva Conference might be reactivated in connection with the 
current Vietnam ~risis. Secretary Rusk descr7bed the possibilities of 
such a gambit in a message ~ to Ambassador Taylor as follows: 
British apparently expect that next Soviet step might 
be to propose a joint statement by two Co-Chairmen on bomb-
ings in North Viet-Nam as reported to Co-Chairmen by regime 
in Hanoi. 
Interest of Soviet Government in co-chairmanship, 
though not yet confirmed, might also r eflect some relief for 
Moscow regarding dilemma in which they may find themselves 
in dealing with HanOi, Peiping and Southeast Asia issues. It 
may prove desirable for us to provide to UK and USSR full 
statement of facts as we' see them, US purpo~es in Southeast 
Asia and our concept of necessary solution .•• He would stop 
short of oursel ves propos ing formal systematic negotiations 
but assumption of 1954 co-chairmanship by two governments 
would imply that they mi&ht themselves explore with in-
terested governments possibilities of solution, vrhich we 
could encourage br othenrise as we see fit. If message is 
made to t,VO Co-Chairmen, which would be made public; it may 
mean that better procedure vrould be to present full documen-
tation on North Viet-Namese aggression to {U.N. Secretary 
Generay in Ifriting for circulation to members rather than 
make oral presentation in meeting of Security Council which 
might require Soviets to act as defense counsel for Hanoi. 
"Obviously, this has bearing on timing of next strike. 
Hope to be in touch with you vlithin next several hours on 
our further reflection on this problem. 
Do not believe a 
Thursday LFebruary l~ strike therefore feasible because of 
this time factor and because these possibilities have not been 
explored here at highest level. 
.. 
~ 
With encouragement from Rusk, the British Foreign Office showed itself 
eager to pick up the Soviet hint. 
London proposed to make a formal ap-
proach to the Soviet Government, thxough UK Ambassador Trevelyan in Moscow . 
Specifically, they wished to instruct the Ambassador to propose to the 
Soviet Government that the Co-Chairmen of the 1954 Geneva Conference re-
quest the Governments whi ch "rere members of that Conference and those 
represented on the International Control Corrnnission lito furnish the 
CO-Chairmen without delay with a statement of their views on the situa-
tion in Viet-Namand, in particular, on the circumstances in which they 
cc;msider that a peaceful settlement could be reached. ' 
In a further discussion 'with Lord Harlech on February 19, 69/ Secre-
tary Rusk agreed to the proposed British action and.Ambassador Trevelyan 
"ras duly instructed to approach the Soviet Foreign Office in MOSCOlf on 
February 20. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
- ,,-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
What were US expectations with respect to this initiative, and how 
did it re~ate to the new policy of pressures against the DRV? 
An excel-
lent indication of St~te Dep~tment thinking on these matters at that 
moment is contained in an unfinished draft memorandum dated February 18, 
prepared by Willi.am P. Bundy and entitled l!"\l}"here Are We Heading?!! 
Because 
it is addressed to the relevant issues of that moment and surveys the 
political-diplomatic scene, it is reproduced here in full: 
This memorandum examines possible developments and prob-
lems if the US pursues the follow'ing policy 'I'li th respect to 
South Viet-Nam: 
a. Intensified pacification "Tithin South Vietnam. 
To 
meet the security problem, this might include. a significant 
increase in present US force strength. 
··b. 
A program of measured, limited, and spaced air attacks, 
jOir:ttly "lith the GVN, against the infiltration complex in the . 
DRV. 
Such attacks would take nlace at the rate of about one a 
week, unless spectacular Viet cong action dictated an immediate 
response out of sequence . 
The normal pattern of such attacks 
would comprise one GVN and one US strike on each occasion, 
confined to targets south of the 19th p~allel, with variations 
in severity depending on the tempo of VC action, but with a slow 
upward trend in severity as the weeks '>Tent by. 
·c. 
That the US itself would take no initiative for talks, 
but would agree to cooperate in consultations -- not a confer-
ence -- undert.aken by the UK and USSR as Co-Chairmen of the 
Geneva Conferences. 
As an opening move, the British vTould 
request an expression of our viel-Is, and ,·re would use this oc-
casion to spell out our position fully, including our purposes 
and what we regard as essential to the restoration of peace. 
We would further present our case against the DRV in the form 
of a long written document to be sent to the President of the 
United Nations Security Council and to.be circulated to members 
. of the Ulil" . 
* 
* 
* 
* 
1. 
Communist res ~onse s. 
a •. Hanoi would allnost certa.inly not feel itself lLl1der 
pressure at any early point to enter into fruitful negotiations 
or to call off. its activity in any way. 
They vlOuld denounce the 
continued air attacks and seek to whip up maximum world opposi-
tion to them. 'IHthin South Viet-Nam, they might avoid spectacular 
actions, but would certainly continue a substantial'pattern of 
activity along :past lines, probably "Tith emphasis on the kind of 
55 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
incidents we have seen this week, in which Communist agents 
stirred up a village ' protest 
against .government air attacks, 
and against the us. 
Basically, they would see the situation ' 
in South Viet-Nam as likely to deteriorate f'urther (crllmble 
as they hav= put it), and would be expecting that at some p~int 
someone in the GVN 'YTill start secret t alks 'YTith them behind 
our backs. 
b. 
Communist China might supply additional air defense 
equipment to the DRV, but we do not believe they 'would engage 
in air operations from Communist China, at least up to the 
point ,,,here the MIGs in the DRV 'YTere engaged and we had found 
it necessary to attack Fukien or possibly -- if the 141Gs had 
been moved there -- Vinh. 
c. 
The Soviets ,vould supply air defense equipment to 
the DRV and would continue to protest our air attacks in strong 
terms. 
HO'YTever, we do not believe they 'Ivould make any new 
commitment at this stage, and they would probably not do so even 
if the Chicoms became even more deeply involved -- provided that 
we were not ourselves attacking Communist China. 
At that point, 
the heat might get a'l-Tfully great on them, and they would be in a 
very difficult position to continue actively working as Co-
Chairman. 
Hov/ever, their approach to the British on the Co-
Chairmanship certainly suggests that they "Tould find some relief 
in starting to act in that role, and might use it as a hedge 
against further involvement, perhaps pointing out to Hanoi that 
the CO-Chairman exercise serves to prevent us from taking extreme 
action and that Hanoi will get the same result in the end if a 
political track is operating a.nd if, in fact, South Viet-Nam 
keeps crumbling. 
They might also argue to Hanoi that the exis-
tence of the political track tends to reduce the chances of the 
Chicoms having to become deeply involved -- which we believe 
Hanoi does not "rant unless it ,is compelled to accept it. ' 
'" 
2. Within South Viet-Nam the new government is a somewhat 
better one, [ Note: this was written one day before the semi-
couE! but the cohesive effects of the strikes to date have at 
most helped things a bit. 
The latest ~ffiCV report indicates a 
dete'riorating situation except in the extreme south, and it is 
unlikely that this can be arrested in any short period of time 
even if the government does hold together well and the military 
go about their business. 
He shall be very lucky to see a level-
ing off, mL~h less any significant improvement, in the next two 
months. 
In short, we may have to ha.ng on quite a long time 
before 'Ive can hope to see an improving situation in South Viet-
Nam -- and this in turn is really the key to any negotiating 
position we could have at ~~y time . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
3. 
On the political track we believe the British will under-
take their role with vigor, and that the Soviets will be more 
reserved. 
The Soviets can hardly hope 'to influence Hanoi much at 
this point, and they certainly have no leverage with Communist 
China. 
In the opening rounds, the Soviets will probably fire 
off some fairly sharp statements that the real key to the situa-
tion is for us to get out and to stop our attacks, and the 
opposing positions are so far apart that it is hard to see any 
useful movement for same time to come. 
vie might well find the 
Soviets -- or even the Canadians -- sounding us out on whether 
we would stop our attacks in return for some moderation in VC 
activity. This is clearly unacceptable, and the very least we 
should hold out on is a verified cessation of infiltration (and 
radio silence) before we stop our attacks. 
Our stress on the 
cessation of infiltration may conceivably lead to the Indians 
coming forward to offer policing forces -- a s~ggestion they have 
made before -- and this would be a constructive move we could 
pick up . 
But, as noted above, Hanoi is most unlikely to trade 
on this basis for a long time to come. 
,,4. 
In S1.IDl. -- the most likely prospect is ' for a prolonged 
period \vithout major risks of esca},ation but equally without 
any give by Hanoi." 
In retrospect, Bundy's expectations appear appropriately sober and 
realistic in comparison with more euphoric vie>vs held by some of his con-
temporaries. 
Particularly >'lith respect to the co-Chairmen. gambit, his 
predictions were strikingly close to the mark~ The British did in fact _ 
"undertake their role with vigor" and, as it turned out, the Soviets were 
indeed "more reserved." 
So much so, that the co-Chairmen initiative 
eventually c&~e to naught. 
At this point in time, however, (in the days following February 20th) 
the Co-Chairman proposal \vas in orbit and real hopes 'were held. out .for it. 
Trevelyan had approached Soviet Deputy F:oreign f.1i~ister Lapin with the 
proposal and the Soviet officials had agreed to take it under advisement, 
warning Trevelyan that absolute secrecy ,,,as essential. 
U. S. Ambassador 
to MoscO\V Foy Kohler, upon learning of the UK/soviet undertaking, ex-
pressed his concern that the air strikes on the DRV pla~ned for FebruarF 
20 would put the Soviets on the spot, and ~rould cause them to _reject the 
British proposal. 70/ 
Washington r eassured Kohler by advising him that the scheduled strikes 
were being postroned and also informed him th2t , when rescheduled, the 
strikes would be tied to a major DRV aggressive act which had just come 
to light . 71/ 
It appears that, on February 16, an armed ocean-going 
North Vietnamese vessel, carrying large quantities of arms and ammunition, 
was intercepted and captured as it vTaS infiltratLng into Vung Ro Bay in 
South Vietnam, to deliver its cargo to the VC . It was thought that, by 
57 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
pegging the strikes primarily to that boat incident, and by directing the 
strikes in part agaiLst a DRV naval base, the risk of an adverse Soviet 
reaction would be minimized. 
During the ::J.ext several days, Washington vras in almost continuous 
communic ation (1) with Taylor in Saigon -- to' ascertain whether the 
political situation had stabilized sufficiently to permit rescheduling 
the postponed air stri..'kes; (2) with Kohler in Moscmr -- to feel the pulse . 
of the Soviet goverD~ent and its likely reaction to the upcoming air 
operation; and (3) with Ambassador Bruce in London -- to monitor the 
progress of the Trevelyan approach to the Soviet Foreign Office concern-
ing the Co-Chairman process . 
Throughout this time, Secretary Rusk was 
visibly torn on the question of "rhether or not to proceed with the air 
strikes. 
He wanted very much to push ahead immediately, in order to 
exploit promptly the DRV arms ship incident which seemed to beg for some 
response . 
But he hesitated to laQDch a strike on behalf of and in con-
cert with a government that was teetering and 1tThose Commander-in-Chief 
was in the process of being deposed; he also wished to avoid angering the 
Soviets, thus possibly sabotaging their Co-Chairmen effort. 
On the other 
ha..Dd, he w'anted to ma..'ke it clear that the U.S. Ivould not indefinitely 
accept a "unilateral ceasefire" while the Co-Chairman effort dragged on. 
It is important to note that the CO-Chairmen gambit was not viewed 
by anyone involved on the US side as a negotiating initiative. 
On the 
contrar'y, every effort was made to avoid giving such an impression. 
Instead , the gambit was intended to provide a vehicle for the public ex- ' 
pression of a tough U.S. position . 
This was clearly implied in Washing-
ton messages to Saigon and London on this issue, as , for example , in a 
cable from Unger to Taylor: 72/ 
You should not reveal possibility this UK/USSR' gambit to 
GVN for time being. 
He naturally wish have it appear entirely 
as their initiative, so that our reply would not be any kind 
of initiative on our part and l>lould, in its content, make 
clear how stiff our vievrs are. 
. 
Finally, by February 24th, since no reply had as yet been received 
from Mosc01,.rand the situation in Saigon had begun to settle dmm, Secre-
tary Rusk felt he could hold off no longer. 
In a mess age to Bruce in 
London, he wrote: 
'We have · decided that we must go ahead iii th next operation 
Feb. 26 unless there should be further political difficluties 
in Saigon. 
Taylor 'iV'ill be seeking poli t j cal clearance after-
noon Feb. 25 Saigon time once Khanh is off the scene. 
vie told Harlech this decision today stating that while we 
recognized British concern and possibility some Soviet reaction 
we cannot even by implication get into positior,t of vrithholding 
58 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive' 
continuation of progrDm. 
v.le may hear further from London 
follo1-Ting his report but would now expect to maintain decision 
and indeed Taylor would probably have gone ahead on politica~ 
side. If matter comes u~ you may of course note that we have 
held off five days but that British have 'lot had any indication 
of Soviet response so that further delay nOl" appeared unwise. 
We continue of CGurse attach major importance to UK/Soviet 
gambit .•. TI/ 
Confidence that the Co-Chairman initiative would pay off was beginning 
to wane, and the air strikes were indeed being rescheduled for February 26. 
A continuous readiness to launch had in fact been maintained every since 
February 20, by simply postponing the strikes for 24 hours at a time and 
laying on new strikes whenever a change in targets or in operating rules 
had been decided upon. 
The February 26 operation 1-laS the fourth repro-
gramming of the strikes and thus went by the code, designation ROLLING 
T'.tflJ)'>l:DER Dr, even though RT I s I through III had been scratched. 74/ 
Fully expecting that the February 26 air operation lvould go off 
as planned, State sent out a cable 75/ to thirteen posts, quoting the 
probable text of a joint GVH/US anno-uncement that was to be made at about 
2:00 a.m. Washington time on February 26, and instructing all addressees 
to contact their respective host governments as soon as FLl\SH notification 
was received that the mission had in fact been executed. 
The execution 
messages however, never came . 
Weather over the entire target area in 
North Vietnam had closed in, forcing another postponement and , ultimately; 
cancellation of the strikes. 
The 'Heather remained adverse for four more 
days . It was not until March 2 that the first of the new program. strikes, 
dubbed ROLLnm THilli1)ER V was actually carried out. 
D. 
Efforts at Public Justification and Persuasion 
The need to communicate the ne,'T policy promptly and persuasively 
to the public had been recognized throughout the 1964 planning process as 
an essential ingredient of any graduated pressures campaign . 
Now the time 
had come to put the information and education plans into effect. 
Over the weekend of February 12, serious work ,'Tas begun in the 
State Department on the preparation of a "White Paper" on the infiltra-
tion of men and supplies from the Korth. 
Such a public report WQS con-
sidered essential to justifying any program of U.S. military operations 
against North Vietnam. 
The compilers of the . exhibits for the public 
record were handicapped hOl'lever , by the fact that the most persuasive 
evidence on DRV 
~ ,nfiltration and support was d-:rived from Spec i al Intelli-
gence sources Ivhich could not be revealed 1-Tithout embarrassment and detri-
me...l1t to other U. S. security interests. 
The \~hi te Paper that was submitted 
to the U.S. public and to the, United Nations on February 27, therefore, 
did not make as strong a case as it might have of the extent and nature of 
DRV involvement in the war in the South. It did ser.ve, hm-lever , to put the 
U.S. case in the public record and to affirm the limited nature of U.S. 
objectives to''{ard North Vietnam. 76/ 
59 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Concurrently, the Administration undertook to communicate to both 
f'oreign and domestic audiences its determination to prevent Communist. 
destruction of' the Goverp~ent of South Vietnam and to underline the 
limited character of its objectives in Southeast Asia . 
A series of 
"leaked" press aJ'lalyses su.ggested that the most recent and the antici-
pated air strikes constituted a clear threat of extensive future destruc-
tion of North Vietnam!s military assets and economic investments. 
They 
inferred that such consequences could be avoided if Hanoi I-Tould agree to 
cease its direct support of the insurgency in the South. 
At the same time, privately the State Department asked the Canadian 
ICC representative Blair Seaborn again to act asa discreet intermediary 
with Hanoi, conveying to the DRV leadership the same statement on Viet-
nam that had been handed by U.S. Ambassador Cabot to Chicom Ambassador 
Wang Kuo-chuan in Trlarsaw on February 24, reaffirming that the United 
States had no desi gns on the territory of North Vietnam, nor any desire 
to destroy the DRV. 
On his March visit to Hanoi, Seaborn sought an 
appointment '..rith Prime Minister Pham Van Dong, but 'I'las obliged to settle 
for a meeting with the chief of the North Vietnamese Army ' s Liaison 
Section, to whom he read the statement . 
This officer commented that it 
contained nothing new and that the North Vietnamese had already received 
a briefing on the Warsaw meeting from the Chicoms. 
The Canadian Govern-
ment publicly noted in April that Seaborn had t'l·TO important conversations 
vTi th DRV officials in recent months , but. did not go into details. 
In the clOSing days of February and continuing through the first 
week of March, Secretary Rusk conducted a marathon public information 
campaign to explain and justify the new U.S. policy and to signal a 
seemingly rea'sonable but in fact quite tough U. S. position. on negotia-
tions . 
In part , the Rusk campaign vTas precipitated by a press confer-
ence comment by U Thant at the United Nations on February 24, implying 
that the U.S. had perha:9s not been as zealous in its quest for peace as 
it might have been. 
Thant went so far as to assert that "the great 
American people, if they only knew the true facts and the backgroQDd to 
the developments in South Vietnam, 'I'fill agree with me that further blood-
shed is unnecessary." 
The suggestion that the U.S Government wasn 't 
leveling with the U.S. public produ~ed a sharp retort from Secretary Rusk; 
We have talked over the past 2 years informally and on a 
number of occasions with the SecretarY-Seneral .•. as well as 
vrith many governments i n various parts of the vTorld .•• But the 
proposals that I know about thus far have been procedural in 
nature . 
The missing piece continues to' be the absence of any 
in,dication +,hat Hanoi i s prepared to stop doing 'I'lhat it is 
doing against its nei~~bors . 
. •. This question of calling a 
conference, QDder 'That circ .... unstances -- these are procedural 
matters. 
Vlhat 'Ive are interested in, what is needed to re-
store peace to Southeast Asia, is substance, content', and 
indication that peace is possible in terms of the appetites 
~~d the attitudes of the other side . 77/ 
60 
TOP SECRET- Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
This and similar themes were endlessly reiterated in the ensuing 
days:' 
The key to peace in .Southeast Asia is the readiness of . 
all in that area to live at peace and to leave their neigh-
bors alone ••.. A negotiation aimed at the confirmation of 
aggression is not possible . 
And a negotiation 'trhich simply 
ends in bitterness and hostility merely adds to the danger. 78/ 
South Viet-Nam is being subjected to an aggression from 
the North, an aggression Ivhich is organized and directed and 
supplied with key personnel and equipment by Hanoi. 
The hard 
core of the Viet Cong I{ere trained in the North and have been 
reinforced by North Vre tnamese from the North Vietnamese army 
Our troops \<Tould come home tomorrow if the' aggressors 'tJQuld 
go north - go back home, and stay at home ..• 
The missing. piece 
is the l ack of an indication that Hanoi is prepared to stop 
dOing what it is dOing, and what it knows that it is doing, to 
its neighbors. 79/ 
But when asked under ,;,hat circumstances the U. S. might sit dO'trn to 
talk to H~~oi, Rusk was clearly as yet unwilling to appear publicly 
receptive: 
I am not getting into the details of what are called 
preconditions, because we are not at that point - yre are 
not at that point. 
Almost every postHar negotiation that 
has managed to settle in some fashion some difficult and 
dangerous question has been preceded by some private indi-
cation behind the scenes that such a negotiation might be 
possible. 
That is missing here -- that is missing here . 30/ 
Rusk's disinterest in negotiation -- exceyt on "absolutist" terms 
was, of course, in concert i.,ri th the vieYT 'of virtually all the President's 
key advisors, that the path to peace "Jas not open.' Hanoi, at about that 
time, held sway over more than half of her southern neighbor and could 
see the Saigon C~vernment crumbling before her very eyes. 
The balance 
of power in South Vietnam simply did not furnish the United States YTith. 
a reasonable basis for bargaining and the signals from Hanoi and MoscO\{ 
-- or lack thereof -- did not encourage optimism about the sort of hard 
settlement the U.S. had in mind. 
All this pointed directly to military 
pressures on North Vietnam and to other. urgent measures to tilt the 
balance of forces the other way. 
Until these measures could have some 
visible and tanfible effect, talk of negotiation could be little more 
than a hollow exercise. 
At the same time, while neither Moscol;' nor Hanoi seemed in the l east 
. interested in U.S. style "conciliation," the likelihood of explosive 
escalation also seemed remote. 
So far there was no. visible sign of 
61 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
ominous enemy countermoves. 
An assessment of probable Soviet. responses 
to the evolving U. S. "pressures " policy, ca~led to the Department by . 
FOY Kohler in MoscQ1,{, ~ was moderately reassuri...'1g and indeed quite 
perceptive: 
1. 
Soviets will make noises but not take decisive action 
in response to specific retaliatory strikes in southern areas 
DRV, probably including -- after publication "v/hite Paper" --
strike against DRV sealift capabilities in this area. 
Indeed, 
Soviets likely to read our failure to continue carry out such 
strikes as confirmation their estimates re weakness our basic 
position in SVN. 
2. 
Soviet miiitary aid program in DRV is probably defen-
sive in nature and Soviets would wish to keep it that Hay. 
However, if attacks on DRV become general, particularly if 
they are extended to industr i al or urban targets and areas 
beyond border zone . 
Soviets will reassess our intent as well 
as basic politico-military situation. If reassessment leads 
them to see U.S. aim as ending existence of DRV as socialist 
state, Soviets will not only step up defensive aid but supply 
means of counterattack , e.g., aircraft for raids on S~~ cities 
and heavy ground equipment. 
While aware of risk that this 
might bring Peiping actively into picture , Soviets will not 
hold back if existence of DRV seems threatened. 
3. 
There seems no possibility of change in present hard 
Soviet posture at least QDtil after March 1 CP meeting and its 
aftermath or until they somehmlT convinced of real danger of 
major escalation and direct confrontation. 
4. 
Najor factor underlying Soviet position is conviction 
that in Vietnam situation, unlike CUQan crisis, "life are almost 
alone among allies and even U.S. Dublic opinion seriously 
divided; any real and pUblicized imDrovem~nt in this picture 
would cor~espondingly influence soviet policy. 
5. 
Apart their estimate as to out' relative isolation, 
Soviet failure move t ovrard negotiations on any basis con-
ceivably acceptable to USG also reflects DRV and CPR posture -
and MOSCO"Vl tS umvillingness or inability to impel DRV to call 
off activities in S~l or yield control of territory they now 
hold. 
To e~ent Soviets can influence commQDist attitude 
toward negctiations, they might in face cf increasingly 
dangerous situat ion decide to "\jork tm·rard settlement based 
on coalition Govt in SVN, convincing mm allies that this 
only t emporary situation. 
6. Najor Soviet Dilemma - Imperatives of commitment and 
position in communist world vs. interest in developing rela-
tions "-Tith US o.nd 'tJest - "\viJ-l persist during Vietnam crisis. 
62 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
If they consider necessary to protect position in o~~ camp, 
Soviets are probably prepared to see relations Hith US suffer 
for indefinite period. 
With the ilI!"nediate fear of escalationtht'.s somewhat allayed and the 
public concern temporarily pacified, attention began to shift tO~Tard de-
veloping ROLLllTG THUNDER into a more forceful continuous program. 
63 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VII. 
ROLLING THLlTIIl)ER BECOI-fES A CONTThUING PROGRAM 
A. 
McNamara's Concern Over Cost-Ineffectiveness of Strikes 
As has been indicated, ROLLING THU1~ER was finally inaugurated, 
after much dela.y a.'1d postponement, on March 2 . 
On that day, 104 USAF 
aircraft (B-52's, F-IOO's, F-I05's, and refueling KC-135's) struck the 
Xom Bang JlJIlIllO Depot, 10Jhile 19 VNAF A- ill ' s hit the Q,uang Khe Naval Base . 82/ 
This was the first strike on the North in "hich USAF aircraft pl e.yed the 
.dominant role . 
Although the attack was officially proclaimed "very suc-
cessful," the loss of four USAF aircraft, three to antiaircraft fire, in-
tensified earlier OSD concern over the effectiveness of the strikes and 
over the vulnerability of US aircraft. 
Shortly after the first t\vO February reprisal raids, the Secre-
t ary of Defense had received some disturbing bomb damage assessment 
reports that indicated that, 
••• with a total of 267 sor~les (including flak suppression, 
etc.) directed Bgainst 491 buildings , \-re destroyed 47 buildings 
and damaged 22 . 
The reports caused McNamara to fire off a r ather blu..l1t memor an-
dum to the CJCS, dated 17 February 1965, which stated in part: 
Although t he four missions left the operations at the 
targets relatively uni.rnpaired, I am quite satisfied "rith the 
results . 
Our primary objective, of course, "ras to communi-
cate our political resolve . 
This I believe 'He did. 
Future 
communications of resolve, hOlvever, will carry a hollOlv ring 
unless ive accomplish more military damage than He have to 
. date. 
Can .... re not better meet our military objectives by 
choosing different types of targets, directing different 
wei ghts of effort against them, or changing the composition 
of the force? 
Surely we cannot continue for months accom-
_ 
plishing no more 'Nith 267 sorties than "\ve did on these four 
missions. 
The Chairman of the JCS promptly asked his staff to look i nto 
the matter and reported back a feiv days J-ater on some initia l points of 
mterest: 
(1) 
We do not have sufficient or timely information 
about the results of the strikes; 
( 2) 
In light of prior detailed study of the t argets 
( 94 Target Study) , the 'freight of effort expended against 
at l east t"ro of them is open to question; 
(3) 
The weaponeeri ng against t he directed targets i s 
open to question. 
64 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In vie,,, of these deficiencies , the CJCS continued, 
... 1 intend to ask the Joint Staff, in draft.ing its 
proposals for future strikes, to insure that the critical 
elements of target selection and "reight of effort are 
evaluated as carefully as possible against specific and 
realistic military objectives. 
At the same time, I believe 
the commander of the operating force should have a degree 
of flexibility with respect to the 'Iveaponeering of the 
strikes and their timing. 
My concern here is that the 
operational commander be given adequate latitude to take 
advantage of his first-hand knmvledge of the target and 
its defenses as '·Tell as of the changing conditions of 
weather and light. 
2. 
I am also asking the Director, DIA, to propose a 
standardized ~~d stre 8~lined system of after-action re-
porting so that prompt and responsive analysis of strike 
results can be made available to those "rho require it. 83/ 
Innnediately after the first ROLLING THUJlillER strike on March 2, 
Deyuty Secretary of Defense Cyrus R. Vance convened a meeting attended 
by Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert and other USAF officials to 
consider using the high-flying B-52's for pattern bombing in either 
North or South Vie tnam to avoid Communist ground fire. 
The Air Staff 
and SAC recommended reserving B-52's for use against major targets in 
the North . 
The idea of B-52 pattern bombing \Vas not again seriously 
considered until April. 
On the same date (March 2) Secretary McNamara 
asked that the Joi~t Staff prepare as soon as possible an analysis of 
US aircraft losses to hostile action in Southeast Asia. 84/ 
An expe-
dited revie,,, and analysis of this subject ,,,as promptly undertaken, 
covering the experience in YM-:KEE TEAlvI (Reconnaissance) , BARREL ROLL 
(Armed Reconnaissance/Interdiction), BLUE TREE (Photo Reconnaissance), 
PIERCE A..'RROW (Tonkin Gulf Reprisal) , FhA.MING DIL'RT and ROLLING THl]1\IDER 
operations . 
The results were reported to the Secretary of Defense on 
March 10, 85/ and, aside from presenting some early and not too reveal-
'ing statistical findings, t he report urged that consideration be given 
to several measures that, the Chairman felt, might help minimize loss 
rates: 
(1) 
Authorize use of NAPALM. 
(2) 
Provide "o:ptimum" strike ordnance not yet available 
in the theater. 
(3) 
Allow the operational commander flexibility in strike 
timing and selection of alternate targets so as to minimize 
"leather degradations and operational interferences at target • 
. 'l'OP SECRBT - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(4) 
Conduct random and frequent weather reconnaissance, 
and medium and low-level photo reconnaissance, over prospec-
tive strike areas of North Vietnam to reduce the likelihood 
of signaling our intentions. 
(5) 
Improve security and cover and deception measures 
at US/ VNAF air bases. " 
These and other measures were exulored in greater depth in a USAF 
Study Team effort l aunched on Narch 15 and reported on in late May. 86/ 
Many of the recommendations to lift restrictions and improve air stril<:e 
technology ,vere being acted upon during this period and in subsequent 
days and wee....~s. 
For example, the restrictions on the use of FARNGATE 
and PACOM aircraft "rere lifted, permitting their use in combat opera-
tions in South Vietnam with USAF markings and without VNAF personnel 
aboard, effective 9 March; 87/ 
and use of napalm against Horth Viet-
namese targets ,vas approved by the President on the same date. 88/ 
B. 
Taylor's Concern Over Feeble, Irresolute Action 
Sharp annoyance over what seemed to him an unnecessarily timid 
and ambivalent US stance on air -strikes was expressed by _~bassador 
Taylor. 
The long delays betvleen strikes, the marginal weight of the 
attacks, and the great ado about behind-the-scenes diplomatic feelers , 
led Taylor to complain: 
I am concerned from standpoint our overall posture 
vis-a-vis Hanoi and communist bloc that current feverish 
diplomatic activity particularly by French and British 
tends to undercut our ability to convey a meaningful signal 
to Hanoi of USG determination to stick it out here ~nd pro-
gressively turn the screws on DRV. 
Seaborn's estimate of 
mood of confidence characterizing DRV leadership despite our 
joint air strikes to date almost identical our estimate .•• It 
appears to me evident that to date DRV leaders believe air 
strikes at present levels on their terri~ory are meaningless 
and that vTe are more susceptible to international pressure 
for negotiations than are they. 
Their estimate may be based 
in part on activities of "our friends ll to "Thich we seem to 
be active party. 
..; 
In my vie"r current developments strongly suggest that Ive 
follo"T simultaneously hm courses of action: (1) attempt to 
apply brak(s to British and others in their headlong dash to 
conference table and leave no doubt in their minds that we 
do not intend to go to conference table Qntil there is clear 
evidence Hanoi (and Peking) prepared to leave neighpors alone; 
and (2) step up tempo and intensity of our air strikes in 
southern part of DRV in order convince Hanoi authorities they 
66 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
face prospect of progressively severe Dunis~Jnent. I fear that 
to date ROLLING THill~~ER in their eyes has been merely a few 
isolated thunder claps. 
The sam~ general considerations apply re our urging British 
to undertake further early soundings re Article 19 Laos Accords 
as Ambassador Martin so cogently states in his EXDIS 1278 to 
Dept. [in w·hich Nartin expresses concern over the risks of 
moving to the conference t able too sooEJ. 
Many of the problems 
which worry him are also applicable to Vietnamese here and I 
share his reasoning and concern. 
It seems to me that vre may be in for a tough period ahead 
but I would hope we will continue to do whatever is required 
and that vre try to keep fundamental objectives vis-a-vis Ha...'1oi 
clear and simple. 89/ 
In a separate cable of the same date, ~ Taylor, with General 
Westmoreland's explicit concurrence , offered his specific recommenda-
tions for increas ing the tempo and intensity of the air strikes. 
In 
effect, he called for a more dynamic schedule of strikes, a several 
week program relentlessly marching North to break the Ivill of the DRV: 
We have a Sense of urgent need for an agreed program for 
the measured and limited air action against military targets 
in DRV LPreviously7 announced. 
The rate of once or twice a 
week for attacks I nvolving two or three targets on each day 
appears to us reasonable as to frequency,and leave s open the 
possibility of increasing the effect on Hanoi by adding to 
the weight of the strLltes (in types of ordnance and sorties 
per target) and by moving northvrard up the target system. 
What seems to be lacking is an agreed program covering 
several weeks which will combine th~ factors, frequency, 
"reight and location of attack .into a rational pattern which 
will convince the leaders in Hanoi that ,ve are on a dynamic 
schedule which "rill not remain static in a narrOlV' zone f ar 
removed from them and the sources of their pm,rer but vThich 
is a moving grmving tp~eat which cannot be ignored. 
I have seen the JCS propoied eight-I'leek program ivhich 
has much to recommend it but, I believe, remai ns too long 
South of the 19th parallel. fJ.t iiJ Seaborn's opinion that 
Hanoi has t~e impression that our air strikes are a limited 
attempt to improve our bargaining position ~~d hence are no 
great cause for immediate concern. 
Our objective should be 
to induce in DRV leadership an attitude favorable to US 
objectives in as short a time as possible in order to avoid 
a build-Up of international pressures to negotiate .. But our 
efforts to date are falling far short of achieving the 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
necessary impact •. In formulating a more effective program of 
future attacks, I would be inclined to keep the rate as indi-
cated, maintain the weight on target as for recent strikes, 
but begin at once a progression of US strikes North of 19th 
parallel ir a SlOVI but steadily ascendinf movement. 
The t ar-
gets in the area South thereof could be reserved l ar gely for 
VNAF and FAR1·:GATE . It is true that the MIG trll'eat 'Ifi l l grow 
as we move North but we have the means to t ake care of it. 
I f we tarry too long in the South, we 'I"ill give Hanoi a .. ,eak 
and misleading signal which 'Ifill work against our ultimate 
purpose. 
General Westmorel and Concurs . 
Taylor's dissatisfaction ,vi th the tempo of the air campaign was by 
no means mitigated by the decision to launch the next scheduled att ack, 
ROLLING THUNDER VI on March 13, as another isolated, stage -managed joint 
US/GVN operation. Notification of the decision to stri ke came to him 
in the follOl'Ting FLASH message; 91/ 
Decision has been taken here to execute ROLLING Tn~~ER VI 
d'\ITing daylight hours Saturday 13 March Saigon time. If weather 
precludes effective strike Phu Qui ammo depot (Target 
40) on this 
date, US portion of ROLLING TW~~ER VI will be postponed until 
14 March Saigon time or earliest date "Vleather -vTill permit effec-
tive US strike of Target 40 . 
HOIvever if US strike weathered out, 
VNAF strike (with US support) on its own primary or alternate 
targets is still authori zed to go . 
Request you solicit Quat 's 
agreement this arrangement . 
If joint US/G~~ strike goes .•. wouldexpect GVN/US press 
announcement be made in Saigon . 
ln1CC has furnished time of 
l aunch in past and this has proven emi nently satisfactory. 
Will continue this arrangement . 
. 
If US strike VTeathered out and GVN strike goes, recommend 
tha.t GVN make brief unilateral press statement which ,vould not 
detract from already agreed US/GVN statement, which we would 
probably .. fish use at time Qf US strike against Target 40 . 
G~~ 
unilateral press a..Tlnouncem~nt should indicate strike made by 
GVN aircraft supported by US aircraft . 
Would hope that announce-
ment, although brief, could also mention target, identifying it 
as military installation associated ,vith i nfiltrat ion. 
Request reply by flash cable . 
Ivashi ngton ' s anticipation that the strike might be weathered out 
proved correct, and Taylor's pique at the further delay i s r eflected in 
his r eply: 
68 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
As reported through military channels, ~~AF is unable to 
fly today. 
Hence, there vlill be no ROLLING THUNDER Mission and , 
no present need to see Quat. 
I am assured that VNAF will be 
ready to go tomor~m-T, 14 'March. 
liTith regard to the delays of 'ROLLING THT.J]\J1)ER VI, I have the 
impression that ~e may be attaching too much importance t 'o 
striking t arget 40 because of its intrinsic military value as 
a target. If we support the thesis (as I do) that the really 
important target is the ,dll of the leaders in Hanoi, virtually 
any target North of the 19th parallel will convey the necessary 
message at this juncture as well as target 40. 
Meanwhile , throug...l-J. 
repeated delays 'iTe are failing to give the mounting crescendo to 
ROLLING TFw'IDER which is necessary to get the desired results. 92/ 
When the strike finally came off, hovlever, on March 14 and 15, it 
was the most forceful attack on the North launched to date. 
24 VNAF 
Al-H t S supported by US flak, CAP and pathfinder aircraft, struck 'iveapon 
installations, depots, and barracks on 'Tiger Island, 20 miles off the 
North Vietna,'llese coast, and more than 100 US aircraft (tw'o-thirds Navy, 
one-third USAF) hit the ammunition depot near Phu Qui, only 100 miles 
southwest of Hanoi. 
Some of the earlier hesitancy about bombing the 
North was beginning tp I-lear off. 
C. 
President's Concern Over Insufficient Pressure in South Vietnam 
v.Thile attention ',.TaS being increasingly focused on pressures , 
against the North, disturbing assessments continued to come to the 
President's attenti.on concerning developments in the South. 
One such 
estiInate 'Ivas 'Westmoreland's analysis, dated February 25 , 'of the military 
situation in the four corps areas. It ,vas essentially in agreement with 
a grave CIA appraisal issued the same day. 
Observing that the pacifica-
tion effort had virtually halted, Westmoreland fores aw in six months a 
Saigon government holding only islands of' strength around provincial and 
district capitals that were clogged with refugees and beset \vith t!end the 
wart! groups asking for a negotiated settlement. 
The current trend pre-
saged a Viet Cong take-over in 12 months, although major towns and bases, 
with U.S. help, could hold out for years . 
To "buy time," permit pressure 
on North Vietnam to take effect, and reverse the decline, he proposed 
adding three Army helicopter companies, flying more ,close support and 
reconnaissance missions ,. opening a "land line" from Pleiku in the hig..h.-
l ands to the , coast, and changing U. S. policy on the use of combat troops. 
9];' 
There was r;.m'l'real concern at the highest .Administration level that 
the Vietnamese military effort might collapse in the South before preB-
sures on the North could' have any significant impact . 
On Narch 2, there-
fore, the President decided to dispatch Army Chief of Staff General 
Harold K. Johnson to Saigon with a high-ra~king team. 
In an exclusive 
' message for .A.mbassador Taylor, Secretary McNamara described General 
Johnson's mission as follm-lS : 
69 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
I 
•. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
After meeting with the President this morning, we believe 
it wise for General Johnson to go to Saigon to meet .. rith you 
and General ifestmorel~~d .•. Purpose of trip is to examine with 
you and General Westmoreland what more can be done within 
South Vietn,.un. 
He will bring "Tith him a list of additional 
actions which has been developed for your consideration~ . 
Would appreciate"your developing a similar list for discussion 
with him. 
In developing list, you may, of course, assume no 
limitation on funds, equipment or personnel. 
He will be pre-
pared to act immediately and favorably on any recommendations 
you and General Johnson may make. 
The President is continuing 
to support such action agai nst North as is now in progress but 
does not consider such actions a substitute for additional 
action lvi thin South Vietnam. 
The President wants us :to examine 
all possible additional actions -- politi cal, military, and 
economic -- to see vhat more can be done in South Vietnam ••• 94/ 
C-eneral Johnson returned from his surveY mission on March 14 with a 
2l-point program 'i'Thich he submitted to the JCS and the SAcretary of 
Defense and i'Thich I'Tas reviewed by the President on MareT, 15, General 
Johnson's recommendations included but went beyond· 1flestmoreland r s pre-
scriptions. 
'With respect to the use of air power in South Vietnam, he 
proposed more helicopters and 0-1 aircraft, possibly more USAF fighter-
bombers (after further ~~CV evaluation), better targeting, and acceler-
ated airfield expansion. 
These proposals were in keeping with recom-
mendations that had been made 'previously by COMUSMACV, and especially 
insistently by CllJCPAC, to expand the use of US air povTer in SVN. 
For 
example, on February 26, in an exclusive message to Gener al Wheeler, 
Admiral Sharp had written: 
" •.• the single most important thing Io[e can 
do to improve the security situation in South Vietnam is to me~e full 
use of our airpower. 95/ 
For Laos, General Johnson favored reorienting BARREL ROLL operations 
to allmo[ air strikes on.' infiltration route's .in the Lao Panhandle to be 
conducted as a separate program from those directed against the Pathet Lao 
and North Vietnamese units. 
This program ','TaS subsequently authorized 
under the nickname STEEL TIGER (see beloYT, p. 76). 
With respect to air action against the North, the Army Chief of Staff 
made two recommendations (designated as points 5 and 6 in his 21-point 
program) : 
.,' -
5. 
Increase the scope and tempo of US air strikes against 
the D:L\V. 
T:lis action could tend to broad;n and escalate the 
"/ar. 
RO\\ever, it could accomplish t he US objective of causing 
the DRV to cease its support and direction of the Viet Cong 
aggression. 
To date, the tempo of p~~i tive air strikes has 
been inadequate to convey a clear sense of US purpose to the 
DRV • 
70 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
6. 
Remove self-imposed restrictions on the conduct of air 
strikes against North Vietnam which have severely reduced their . 
effectiveness and made it impossible to approach the goal of 4 
missions per vleek. 
Restrictions ,.;hich should be liI't-ed are: 
·a. 
Requirement that a US strike be conducted concurrently 
with a VNAF strike . 
b. 
Requirement that US aircraft strike the primary target 
only. 
c. 
Ban on use of classified munitions. 
d. 
J'JarrO\{ geographical limitations imposed on target 
selection. 
e. 
Requirement to obtain specific approval from Hashing-
ton before striking alternate targets when required by adverse 
weather conditions or other local conditions. 96/ 
After revievring these reconJ..'Tlendations, the President approved most of 
General Johnson's program. 
In regard to the atr strikes against the North, 
the President authorized important new actions , as subsequently described 
by the JCS: 97/ 
Action (paras 5 & 6) : 
The scope a..nd tempo of air strikes 
agains't l'l'TN is being increased in current plans . 
Depots, LOCs, 
and air defense ground environment facilitie s vrill be stressed 
in operations .in the near future. 
The reauirement for concur-
rent US-'1lNAF strikes has been removed. 
O~ly prime t argets will 
be designated as primary or alternates for US aircraft, thus 
lifting restriction in 6b above . 
Greater timing flexibility will 
be provided for weather and oth~r delays. Tactical reco0llaissance 
has been authorized atmedium .level for targets south of the 20th 
parallel to support the expanded progra.'Il. 
Specific recommendations 
on para 6c, quoted above, are requested. 
Restrictions in 6d and e, 
quoted above, have been lifted in ROLLlliG Tti~~~ER S~T and will 
so remain in subsequent programs. 
The Presi dential decision marked a major turning point in the 
ROLLllm THUl'IDER operation. 
Air action against the North was being trans-
formed from a sporadic, halting effort into a regular and determined 
program. 
D. 
ROLLllm THUIillER VII -- Enter "Regulari tyl! and "Determinationll 
The March 15 Presidential guidelines were clearly reflected in 
the instructions that 1dashington sent to Saigon describing the new 
charact ~r of ROLL.L;G TtiJIIDER to begin with RT VII on Harch 19. 
The in-
structions contain at least six nOVel features : 
71 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(1) 
The strikes were to be packaged in a week's program at 
a time; 
(2) 
precise timing of the strikes were to be left to field 
commander s j 
(3) 
the re~uirement for US-VNAF simultaneity was to be 
dropped; 
(4) 
the strikes were no longer to be specifically related 
to VC atrocities; 
(5) 
publicity on the strikes was to be progressively reduced; 
and 
(6) 
the impression henceforth to be given was one of regularity 
and determination. 
Here is the full text of the Secretary of State's message to Ambassa-
dor Taylor, describing the ne'\V' program: 98/ 
Having in mind considerations r aised your ref tel LTay1or's 
Saigon 2889 of March 8th, quoted onpp.66-677 and recommenda- " 
tions of General Johnson following his return, longer range 
progr8.l"n of action against North Viet Nam has been given pri-
ority consideration here and program for first week for 
ROLLING THUNDER VII, has been decided, for execution this 
"reek. 
Details this program which includes one US and one 
VNAF strike together with Qne US and two VNAF route armed 
recce is subject of instructions being sent through military 
channels. 
You will note these instructions leave to military 
commands in field decisions as to specific timing within period 
covered. 
Execution of first action under ROLLn~G THill~ER VII 
may take place anytime from daylight March 19 Saigon time. 
Although program, contains full measureVNAF participation, 
requirement that US and VNAF operations proceed simultaneously 
is dropped. 
You are requested to see Pri Min ASAP in order to outline 
to him this further program we have in mind and to solicit G~i 
participation as specified therein. 
You should convey to PriMin 
that proposed program, on which you will be providing him vTith 
further information in successive weeks, is designed to maintain 
pressure on Hanoi and persuade North Vietnamese regime that 
costs' of continuing their aggression becoming unacceptably high. 
At same time Q,uat should understand I're continue seek no enlarge-
ment of struggle and have carefully selected targets .'lith vie'N' 
to avoiding Qndesirable provocation. 
Further, objective is to 
continue reassure Government and people South Viet Nam "iV'e are 
72 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and will continue fight by their side and we expect they vrill 
a.lso be making maximum efforts in South Viet Nam where a real 
setback to Vje t Cong ",ould do more than perhaps anything else 
to persuade Hanoi stop its aggressio·n. 
With initiat~on ROLLING TWillIDER VII we believe publicity 
given US and VNAF strikes should be progressively reduced, 
although in its place there should be picture of GVN and US 
pursuing with regularity and determination program against the 
North to enable South restore its independence and integrity 
and defend itself from aggression from North. 
Larger strikes 
(ROLLING THUNDER VII A and VII B) be announced as before but 
suggest in future that such announcements' not contain references 
to Viet Cong atrocities, etc. Instead, t hese matters, which 
should get full attention, might be subject of separate and 
perhaps regular press briefings by GVN ,dth full US support. 
As regards route recce, we question whether vIe should take 
initiative to aD~ounce these missions since this could contri-
bute to impression of substantial increase in activity. 
At 
same time we presume reporters will get wind of these missions, 
Hanoi ,dll report them and VI'JAF may not l'lish maintain silence. 
Therefore seems difficult avoid replying to inevitable press 
questions. 
Request PIO meeting opening tomorrovT Honolulu to 
look into this one and give us and Saigon its r ecommendations; 
possibility it should consider passing off all route recce 
missions in low key replies to queries as "routine recce. 1I 
ROLLING THll{OER had thus graduated to the status of a regular and 
continuing program. 
~-Jhat nOH remained to be more carefully re-examined 
-- though hardly resolved -- was the problem of target emphasis. 
..; 
73 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VIII. 
TARGET Rll,.TIOKALE SHIFTS TmV-ARD INTERDICTION 
Late February and early 1-1arch, 1965 saw a significant refocusing of 
target emphasis. 
Up to that time -- in the initial U.S. reprisal: strikes 
and the first ROLLING THU~~ER actions -- target selection had been com-
pletely dominated by political and psychological considerations. 
Para-
mount in the Administration's target choices were such complex and often 
conflicting objectives as boosting the GVN's morale, evidencing the firm-
ness of UoS. resolve, demonstrating the potential for inflicting pain upon 
the DRV, providing a legal r ationale for our actions, and so forth. 
Relatively little '.·!eight was given to the purely phys:lcal or more directly 
military and economic implications of whatever target destruction might be 
achieved. 
With the gradual acceptance, beginning in March, of the need for a 
militarily more significant, sustained bombing program, serious attention 
began to be paid to the develo]ment of a target system or systems that 
would have a more t angible and coherent military rationale. 
The first 
and most obvious candidate for such a target concept was that of inter-
dicting the flow of men and supplies into South Vietnam bY striking the 
lines of comm1l..nication (LOC' s)' of the DRV. 
Since North Vietnamese 
"aggression'! was the principal legal justification for U.S. bombing r aids 
upon the DRV, attacking and impeding the visible manifestations of this 
aggression -- the infiltration -- also seemed logical and attractive from 
this international legality point of view. 
The Secretary of Defense's attention l'las called to this target con-
cept as early as 13 February, when the Joint Chiefs briefed MCI'amara in 
the Chairman's office on an analysis of the southern portion of the North 
Vietnamese railway system. . It I'laS pointed out in the briefing that South 
of the 20th :parallel there exists about 115 miles of operable rail systems 
and that the vulnerable points on this southern portion of the system are 
five bridges of 300 feet or greater length and the railway classification 
yards at Vinh. It "Tas argued that the bridges l'lere very lightly defended 
~Dd that only the rail yards at Vinh would Dose any serious anti-aircraft 
defense problem •. The CJCS felt that: 
. 
. 
There is no doubt but that the six targets mentioned com-
prise an attractive, vulnerable and remunerative target system 
which ,,!ould hurt the Korth Vietnamese psychologically, econo-
mically and militarily. 
As regards the latter, the destruction 
of the southern bridge system would hamper and delay the move-
ment of DRV /CHICO?-l ground forces to the south and, like"Tise, 
would place a stricture on the quantities of materiel and per-
sonnel I·rhich can be infiltrated through 1aos and South VietucuD.. 
A miniJuUl!l of 201 strike sorties lvould be required to attack 
vTith a high degree of assurance the six targets simultaneously 
vThich would be militarily the r;:ost desirable timing of attack. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In a follow-up memorandum, 221 
the CJCS forwarded to the Secretary 
of Defense a DIA analysis of VC attacks on the South Vietnamese rail,:·ray 
system during 1963 and 1964, and indicated his C'OilCUrrence with Ambassa-
dor Taylor that these attacks justified US/Gv~ strLKes against the r ail 
system in North Vietnam. 
The CJCS then added the follmdng recommenda-
tion: 
As discussed with you on 13 February, 1,'rhile I strongly 
recommend that "re attack the Eorth Vietnamese rail system as 
soon as possible, I would recommend against first striking 
the southern elements thereof. 
Should we do so I ,wuld anti-
cipate that the DRV would t ake both passive and active defense 
measures to protect rolling stock and bridges and, probably, 
would start wor~ on train ferries or truck by-passes in order 
to ameliorate the effects of our strike. As pointed out 
earlier I would advocate militarily that the entire southern 
segment of the rail system be struck simultaneously. 
Should 
this be politically objectionabLe, I would recommend that the 
two northern targets -- Dong Phuong rail/highvay bridge a.nd 
Thanh Roa bridge (prestige bridge) -- be the first targets 
attacked in order to trap the ma..'{imum quantity of rolling 
stock south of the 20th parallel where i're could destroy it 
at least. 
The. Secretary of Defense responded to this recommendation by invit-
ing the JCS to develop a detailed plan for an integrated attack on the 
DRV rail system south of the 20th parallel, with the o~tion of attacking 
the targets individually on an incremental basis rather than all at 
once. 100/ 
This re quest set in motion a p l~nning effort by the Joint 
Staff and by U.S. military commands in the Pacific area, and gave rise 
to spirited discussions and re2ommendations that culminated at the end 
of r.larch in the submission of the JCS 12-vTeek bombing program, essentially 
built around the LOC interdiction concept. 
General TNestmoreland, ,vi th Ambassador Taylor's concurrence , strongly 
endorsed the interdiction rationale in mid-~,larch. In a LllIDIS cable to 
Admiral SharI> and General 'tJheeler , lOll 
he called attention to the 
mounting VC attacks on transportation targets in South Vietnam, and 
argued that: 
The Viet Cong's intensive efforts against lines of cO!lL7D.uni-
cations ''lOuld mel~e strikes against DRV LOC' s highly appropriate 
at this time. 
In vieli heavy traffic recently reported moving 
south, sud'. strikes ,wuld also be military desirable. 
Moreover, 
these atta,;ks by interrupting the flm-r of consumer goods to 
southern DRV i'iOuld carry to the I'MT man in the street, with 
minimum loss of civilian life, the message of U.S. determination. 
Accordingly, early i nitiation of ROLLDiG TIfmlffiER strikes and 
armed reconnaissance is recommended against DRV lines of communi-
cation 1,.,rith initial emphasis on railroad and highvray bridges 
south of 19 degrees north . 
75 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Counter-infiltration operations also received a boost from the 
recommendation in General Jo~nson's report to the effect that ~~EL 
ROLL be re-oriented to increase its military effectiveness against 
Lao Pan.h.andle infiltration routes into South Vietnam. 
Acting upon 
that recommendation and upon a Presidential directive to make a maxi-
mum effort to shut off infiltration into SVN, a ne,v program, nicknamed 
STEEL TIGER, was deve~oped, for the conduct of greatly intensified air 
operations against routes and targets in Laos associated with infiltra-
tion. 102/ 
. 
At about the same time, a Pacific Command study group developed · 
a more comprehensive concept of air operations lito attrit, h'lrass, and 
interdict the D::\V south of 20 degrees. II 
In a lengthy cable to the Joint 
Chiefs excerDted bel?w, Admiral Sharn described the concept as follows: 
103/ 
-
~ 
-
The program calls for an integrated strike, armed recce 
and recce program designed to cut, in de.!?th, the NVN logistic 
net,vork south of 20 degrees, and to continually attrit and 
harass. by-pass and repair reconstitution efforts. 
This program provides for primary bridge/ferry cuts and 
highway blockage/take out cuts on major long-haul road and 
rail routes. It additionally cuts the full road network in-
cluding all feeder and by-pass routes which develop into 4 
main entry/funnels to Laos and Sv}T. 
All t ar gets selected are 
extremely difficult or imposs ible to by-~ass. The program 
also provides for concurrent disruption of the sea-carry to 
SVN with strikes against suspect coastal staging points 
supporting end-running shi::?ping into the area, as well as SVN. 
LOC network cutting in this depth will degrade tonnage 
arrivals at the main II funne Is f! and ,vill develop a broad series 
of new targets such as backed-up convoys, off-loaded materiel 
. dumps, and personnel staging areas at one or both sides of 
cuts. 
Coupling these strikes with seeding and re-seeding 
miss ions to hamper repairs, ivide r anging arrv.ed recce mis sions 
against "developed" t argets, and coastal harass and attrit 
missions against coastal staging facilities, may force major 
DRV ·log flmv to sea-carry and into surveillance and attack by. 
our S~{ coastal sanitization forces ... 
In summary~ recommend concerted attacks against LOC 
targets recommended herein be initiated concurrently with 
interdiction targets programmed for ROLLllTG TWill'illER 9-13. 
Preferentially, recommend a compressed IlLOC cut program" 
. similar to m~l ';lroposal for a IlRadar Bilsting Day. II 
This 
should be follm'ied by completion of atta cks on other than 
TOP SEC.RET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
LOC targets in ROLLlliG TH1J]',1)ER 10-13, Phase II armed recce would 
be conducted concurrently with these actions and would be con-
tinued indefinitely to make DRV sU~Dort to the VC in SVN and 
PL/Vl.1 in Laos as difficult and costly as possible. 
. 
As these recommendations reached the JCS, the Joint Chiefs were 
intensely pre-occu::?ied ivi th an interservice division over the issue of 
the nature and extelit of proposed l arge-scale U.S. troop deployments to 
South Vietn~, requiring adjudication among at least 10 separate pro-
posals, and among videly differing vie-loTS of the several Service Chiefs. 
There were also SUbstantial differences over the future character of t he 
bombing program. 
On this latter issue, Air Force Chief of Staff General 
McConnell took a maverick position, opting for a 28-day air program 
against North Vietnam to destroy all targets on the 94-target list. 
He 
proposed beginning the air strike s in the southern part of North Vietnam 
and continuing at t vTO - to Six-day intervals until H3.noi itself was 
attacked. 
IITtThile I support a:)pro:priate deployment of ground forces in 
South Vietn~, II IkConne 11 '",rote, II it must be done in concert vTi th fail 
overall plan to eliminate the source of Fhil insurgency. II 
McConnell 
believed that his proposal \~Tas consistent ivi th previous ·JCS view's on 
action against the North and 'would be a strong deterrent against open 
Chinese intervention. 104/ 
General HcConnell I-Ti thdrew his 28-day proposal from JCS considera-
. tion when i tbecame a:9parent th2.t the Joint Chiefs were inclined to 
accept much of the CIFCPAC recommendation for a liLaC-cut progr~1I as 
sUIllIllarized above, and to incor:porate some of McCO!1..ne11 's concepts in a 
12-week air strike program that the Joint Staff was preparing in response 
to the Secretary of Defense's request and in accordance with his guidance. 
The JCS 12-week program vTas briefed to the Secretary of Defense con-
ceptually on Harch 22 and submitted to him formally on Narch 27 under 
cover of a JCS memor ~~dum of that date. 105/ 
The program is described in a detailed ft..nnex to the memorandum as 
follo"Js; 
1. 
Concept. 
The concept , simply. stated, is to conduct an 
air strL"ke . program during the remaining 10 ,-reeks of a 12-lveek 
program "Thi eh increase s in intensity and severity of damage 
over the period. 
The :program c~~ be considered in four -phases. 
a. 
The initial phase consists of a three-week inter-
diction campaign against the vuL~erable Democratic Republic of 
Vietnam (DPV) LOCs south of the 2mh parp.lle1. 
The conce:pt of 
this campai gn i s to conduct strikes against a number of inter-
related but se:parated choke points I'Thich lvill disrupt the flmy 
of military supplies and equipment and t~~ the DRV capability 
to restore these facilities. Essential to the success of this 
phase is the initial attacks on t ar gets 1;0. 14. and 18.8 ffhanh 
77 
TOP SECRST - Sensitive 
,. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Hoa and Dong Phuong RR/Highv!ay bridgeY. 
The dropping of at 
least one span in either and preferably both of these bridges 
will sever the main north-south railroad and highvray routes 
in sufficient depth for an effective follm-r-on program. 
This 
initial actton would be accompanied by an intense armed recon-
naissance mission to destroy the isolated transport equipment. 
Subsequent strikes against choke points throughout the isolated 
area are designed to make the program effective and to compli-
cate the DRV recovery program. 
Day and night armed reconnais-
sance would be conducted at random intervals to harass these 
recovery efforts and to sustain the interdiction, including 
armed reconnaiss ance against junk traffic over sea LOCs. 
This 
initial yrogram should bring home to the population the effects 
of air strikes since consumer good vlill be competing with mili-
tary supplies for the limited transport . 
An effective inter-
diction in this area ,-rill also illlpede the DRV capability to mass 
sizeable military forces and to deploy air defense resources. 
The r emaining fey! installation targets in this area 'Hould be 
left for later strikes by ¥lJ.M'. 
Also, the interdiction in this 
area l-JQuld be sustained by VllAF as US strikes moved to the north. 
b. 
The second phase, the launching of the interdiction 
campaign north of the 20th parallel, introduces a consideration 
which was not a major factor in the campaign in the southern DRV; 
i.e., the possibility of ~rrG intervention as strikes are made 
against targets progressively closer to the Hanoi-Haiphong area. 
In order to reduce this possibility to a minilllum, the first v!eek 
of air operations north of the 20th parallel includes strikes 
against the radar net in the delta area to blind or minL~ize 
DRV early warning and intercel?t ca:Qability . 
Follm·ling these 
preparatory atte.cks, o:perations against the LOCs north of the 
20th para.llel are scheduled with the primary objective of 
isolating the DRV from external overland sources; i.e., rail 
and highi'Jay supply routes from Communist China. 
Subsequent to 
cutting these primary LOCs, the initial phase of the interdic-
tion campaign "lOuld be completed by striking LOC targets in 
depth throughout the area of the DRV north of the 20th parallel . 
c. 
Having completed the primary interdiction progr 2~ 
in the delta area, ' a substantially imfer effort should maintain 
its effectiveness. 
~hth his overland LOC cut, blocked, and 
harassed, the enemy can be expected to turn more ' and more to 
his port facilities and sea LOC. 
The ninth week air strikes 
will i nclude attacks against these port f acilities and the 
mining of seal-rard a:9proaches to block the enemy from relieving 
his resu~:)ply problems over the sea LOC. 
Strikes vTill be initi-
ated during the tenth week against ammunition &~d supply dumps 
to destroy on-ha.nd stores of supplies and equipment to further 
aggravate his logistic })roblems. 
78 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
d. 
In the wind-up phase of the 12-week program (during 
the eleventh and hTelfth week), strikes against on-hand supplies, 
equipment, and military f acilities ,vill be continued, attacking 
remaining "mrth-,{hile targets throughout the DRV. 
As a part of 
this phase, industrial t argets outside of population areas will 
be struck , leading up to a situation where the enemy must realize 
that the Hanoi and Haiphong areas vTill be the next logical tar-
gets in our continued air campaign. 
2. 
ffhe program include~7 an anti-NIG strike package; how-
ever, as provided in the policy guidance furnished the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, this mission ,,,ill not be executed unless the 
DRV ~rrG aircraft are aole to impair the effectiveness of the 
strike forces. 
Combat air patrol aircraft, in sufficient num-
bers to deter MIG attack, will accomp211y all missions and vTill 
engage these DRV aircraft as required to protect the force. 
Strike forces and armed reconnaissance aircraft may persist in 
their missions but other reconnaissance missions ,-rill brea...'k off 
mission to avoid contact with lUG aircraft if feasible. 
Heavily 
populated areas Hill be avoided by both strike and armed recon-
naissance missions. 
3. 
Strike sorties for the next ten ,·reeks ,·rould total ap-
prox:ilnately 3,000 or roughly 300 per week . 
CINCPAC has reported 
a capability to conduct approximately 1,600 strL"-e sorties per 
week op. a sustained basis. 
This leaves ample margin for US air 
support within South Vietnam and Laos and substa...ntial armed 
reconnaissance to sustain the LOC interdiction .•. 
Interestingly, the Joint Chiefs did not endorse the entire air strike 
program they submitted to the Secretary of Defense. 
They recommended that 
only the first phase (third, fourth, and fifth ,'leeks of the program) be 
approved for execution. 
They had evidently failed to reach agreement on 
the l ater phases (weekS six through hrelve), and indicated to the Secre-
t ary of Defense that they were still in the process of "considering 
alternatives for a follow'-on program of air strikes beginning ",rith the 
sixth ,·reek . 
They ,,-rill advise you further in this regard, taking account. 
of the developing situation, the current policy considerations, and mili-
tary measures available to us. II 
As ma,tters developed, hOirever, even the three-vreek program endorsed 
by the JCS was not approved by the Secretary of Defense, 'though it 
strongly influenced the nei·! interdiction-oriented focus of the attacks 
that vTere to follov) , as well as the part icular targets that were seler:ted. 
But neither the Secretary of Defense nor· the President was ,;Tilling to 
approve a multi-yleek program in advance. 
They clearly preferred to 
retain continual personal control over attack concepts a.!?-d individual 
target selection. 
Consequently, although the Joint Chiefs strongly urged 
79 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
that '~the field connnander be able to detect and exploit targets of oppor-
tunity ... ", action in the air war against the DRV continued to be directed 
at the highest level and connnunicated through weekly guidance provided 
by the Secretary of Defense IS ROLL]J\lG THUFiDER planning messages . 
80 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IX. 
REASSESSMENT AS OF APRIL 1 li.ND THE ImAM 328 DECISIOl'~S 
A. 
The Situation in South Vietnam 
A curious phenomenon concerning the period of late lilarch and 
early April 1965 Ivas the great divergence among vievlS that ivere being 
expressed about the then prevailing state of affairs in South Vietnam. 
Some quite favorable assessments emanated from Saigon. 
For example, 
~ffiCV's Monthly Evaluations for Mar ch ~~d April were most reassuring: 
March, 1965: 
Events in Harch were encouraging .•. RVNAF 
ground operations were highlighted by renevied operational 
effort .•• VC activity ,vas considerably belo-w the norm of the 
preceding six months and indications ,fere that the enemy ,vas 
engaged in the re-supply and re-positioning of units possibly 
in preparation for a nevl offensive... In summary, March has 
given rise to some cautious optimism. 
The current government 
appears to be taking control of the situation and, if the 
present state of popular morale can be sustained and strength-
ened, the. GVN, l'Ti th continued U. S. support, should be able to 
counter future VC offensives successfully. 
April, 1965: 
Friendly forces retained the initiative 
during April ~~d a review of events reinforces the feeling 
of optimism generated last month ... ln summary, curr~nt trends 
are highly encouraging and the GVN may have actually turned the 
tide at long last. 
HOvlever, the re are some disquieting factors ' 
which indicate a need to avoid overconfidence. 
A test of these 
trends should 'be forthcoming in the next fe,v months if the VC 
launch their expected counter-offensive and the period may \'Tell 
be one of the most important of the war. 
Similarly encouraging comments I.Tere contained in A.mbassador Taylor I s 
NODIS weeklies to the President -- ·e.g., in Sai gon 2908, March 11, 1965: 
The most encouraging ~ henomenon of the past ifeek has been 
the rise in Vietnamese morale occasioned by the air strikes 
against North Vietnam on March 2, the announcement of our in-
tention to utilize U.S . jet aircraft vTithin South Vietnam, and 
the landing of the Marines at Danang which is still going on. 
The press and the public have reacted most favorably to all 
three of these events. 
And in Saigon 2991, March 17, 1965: 
Ihth the grm-ling pressure on North Vietnam, the psycho-
logical atmosphere continues to be favorable. 
What· is still 
missing in this ne-,[ atmos:9here is the image of a Vietnamese 
Government giving direction and purpose to its people. 
81 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
" ,. 
.... 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
On the other hand, a much more sobering assessment '.'Tas contained 
in General Westmoreland's Commander's Estimate of the Situation in 
South Vietnam, dated 26 March 1965, vlhich bluntly asserted that RVKAF 
would not be able to build up their strength ra9idly and effectively 
enough to blunt the coming VC summer offensive or to seize the initia-
tive from them. 
The document ~lso estimated that the program of air 
activity against the North, 'iThile it might ultimately succeed in caus':' 
ing the DRV to cease its support of the war, would not in the short run 
have any major effect on the situation in the South. 
The view from lfJashington vras even less hopeful. Assistant Secretary 
of Defense John HcNaughton sUmmed up the situation in the follovring words: 
lO§'/ 
The situation in general is bad and deteriorating. 
The 
VC have the initiative. Defeatism is gaining among the rural 
population, somevThat in the cities, and even among the soldiers 
-- especially those with relatives in rural areas. 
The Hop Tac 
area around Saigon is making little progress; the Delta stays 
bad; the country has been severed in the north. 
G~~ control 
is shrinking to enclaves, some burdened 'tTi th refugees. 
In 
Saigon ,fe have a remission: Quat is giving hope on the civilian 
side, the Buddhists h8.ve calmed, and the split generals are in 
uneasy equilibrium. 
. 
A more complete and balanced' overview' ioTaS prepared by HcGeorge fjundy 
in a memorandum outlining IIKey Elements for Discussion" for an April 1 
meeting with the President: 
Morale has improved in South Vietnam. 
The government has 
not really settled dovm, but seems to be hopeful both in its 
capacity and in its sense of political forces. 
The armed 
forces continue in reasonably good shape, though top leader-
ship is not really effective and the ratio of armed forces to 
the VC build-Up is not good enough. 
The situation in many areas of the countryside continues 
to go in favor of the VC, although there isnmoi a temporary 
lull. The threat is particularly serious in the central 
provinces, ~nd the VC forces may be regrouping for m~jor 
efforts there in the near future. 
Hanoi has shown no signs of give, and Pei9ing has stiffened 
its position vTithin the l ast ... reek . 
\\fe still "believe that atta,cks 
near Hanoi might substantially raise the odds of Pei ping coming 
in vTi th air. 
Meamrhile , vTe expect HDlloi to continue and st ep 
up its infiltration both by land through Laos and by sea. 
There 
are clear indications of different vievrooints in Hanoi, Peiping, 
and Moscow (and even in the so-called L~iberation Front), and 
82 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
continued sharp friction beb,een Hoscow and Peiping. 
However, 
neither such frictions nor the pressure of our present slOl,ly 
ascending pace of air attack on North Vietnam can be expected 
to produce a real change in Hanoits position for some time, 
probably 2 - 3 months, at best. 
A key question for Hanoi is whethe~ they continue to m~e 
real headway in the south, or whether the conflict there starts 
to move against them or at least appear increasingly tough. If 
the fonner, even a major step-up in our air attacks would 
probably not cause them to become much more reasonable; if the 
latter, the situation might begin to move on a political track 
-- but again in not less than 2 - 3 months, in our present 
judgment . 
B. 
International Diplomatic Moves 
On the diplomatic front, there had been no indication of any 
desire for talks from Hanoi, Peking, or Nosco"r. 
The British CO-Chai rmen 
initiative h9.d been t urned down by the Soviet Government, '-Thich first 
floated a totall y unaccent able counteroronosal -- in the form of a 
statement condemni ng the-U.S. "gross v5..01-;;'tion of the Geneva Accords" 
and calling on the U. S. "to immediately cease their aggressive acts 
against the DRV and to vrithdra,'r their troops ... 11 -- and then totally 
rejected the British proposal. By March 16 , I.rhen Gromyko met vrith 1JK 
Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart in London, it had become quite clear 
that the b 'To Geneva Co-Chairmen would not be able to agree on a mess<;lge 
sufficiently objective to be mutualiy accept able to other members of 
. the Conference. 107/ 
Gromyko had made a public statement after the 
meeting in London to the effect that the United States ,wuld have to 
deal directly vrith Hanoi on the Vietnam situation, to 1:rhich Secretary 
Rusk had replied. 108/ 
I agree with ~rr . Gromyko ~hat Hanoi is the key to peace 
in Southeast Asi a. If Hanoi stops molesting its neighbors, 
then peace can be restored promptly and U. S. forces can come 
home. 
I regret that the Soviet Union, \·rhich was a signatory 
of the 1954 and 1962 accords 
annears disinclined to nut its 
, 
~~ 
~ 
full " eight behind those agreements . 
A second initiative had been l aunched by President Tito of Yugoslavia 
in early March. 
Tito had written to President Johnson on Harch 3, urging 
immediate negotiations on Vietnam vrithout either side imposing conditions. 
The President hed. replied on lilarch 12, d.escrihing the background of our 
involvement in Vietnam and stating that there 'would be no bar to a 
peaceful settlement if Hanoi ceased "aggression against South Vietnam. I: 
Titots concern prompted him to convene a conference'of 15 nonaligned 
nations 'Which met in Belgrade from Harch 13 to 18 and issued an appeal, 
ultimately signed by 17 nations . 
(Afghanistan , Algeri a , Cyprus, Ceylon, 
83 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea , India, Iraq, Kenya, Nepal, Syria, Tunisia, U.~, 
Uganda, Yugoslavia, and Zambia.) 
The declaration blamed "foreign inter-
vention in various forms ll for the aggravation of the Vietnam situation 
and repeated Tito' s call for negotiations I-'Ti thout preconditions. 
Yet another third-party peace initiative came from U.N. Secretary 
General U Thant. 
U Thant proposed a three-month period in "Thich there 
would be ITa temporary cessation of all hostile military activity, whether 
overt or covert, across the 17th parallel in Vietnam." 
McGeorge Bundy commented on these nronositions in his April 1 "Key 
Elements for Discussion" Memorandum. in ~ m~nner suggesting that he had 
very little expectation that any of these initiatives would lead to an 
early conference: 
We think the U Thant proposal should be turned off. 
(Bunche tells us U Thant will not float it publicly if we 
reject it privately). It is not clear that the trade-off 
would be to our advantage, even if it could be arranged, 
'and in any case, ''Ie prefer to use U Tha...nt for private 
feelers rather than public proposals. 
We can tell U Thant 
that ,'Ie have no objection on his sounding out Hanoi on this 
same point, however, and that if he gets a response, we 
would be glad to comment on it. 
. 
The 17 nation proposal is more attractive. 
We are in-
clined to propose to Quat that both South Vietnam and the 
U.S. should accept it 1.'lith a covering statement of our good, 
firm, clear objectives in ally such negotiation. 
The Presi-
dent has already made it clear that he will go anywhere to 
talk vrith anyone, and we think the 17 nation proposal is 
one to ,vhich ,ve can make a pretty clear response 0 
Tactically, 
it .. rill probably not lead to any early conference, because the 
position of Hanoi and Peking will be that they vlill not attend 
any meeting until our bombings stop. 
The Secretary of state 
will elaborate on these propositions. 
C. 
An End to "Reprisal!! 
In mid-morning of March 29, VC terrorists exploded a bomb out-
side the U.S. embassy in Saigon, killing and ,wunding many JI.mericans and 
Vietnamese. It vms the boldest and most direct Communist action against 
the U. S. since the attacks at Pleiku and Qui Nhon which had precipitated 
the FLA.MI NG DAR':" reprisals. 
ALmost simultaneously, Ambassador Taylor 
enplaned for talks in Washington--and both cities were instantly abuzz 
with speculation that the war had entered a new and perhaps critical 
phase. 
Indeed, Admiral Sharp promptly urged the JCS to recorumend a 
forceful r eply to the VC outrage, in the form of an out-of-turn 
84 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
s~ectacular bombing attack upon a significant target in the DRV outside 
of the framework of ROLLIll"G THlJTIU)ER. 109/ 
The plea, havever, did not 
fallon responsive ears . 
At this point; the President preferred to 
maneuver quietly to hel~ the nation get used to living with the Vietnam 
crlS1S. 
He pla;Y-2d dOvln any drama intrinsic iI' Taylor's arrival by hav-
ing him attend briefings at the Pentagon and the State Department before 
calling at the T,\Thite House; and he let it be knol-m that the U. S. had no 
intention of conducting any further specific reprisal raids against North 
Vietnam in reply to the bombing of the embassy. 
Instead, he confined 
himself to a ~ublic statement: 
rhe terrorist outrage aimed at the American Embassy in 
Saigon shows us once again what the struggle in Viet-Nam is 
about. 
This >v-anton act of ruthlessness has brought death 
and serious injury to innocent Vietnamese citizens in the 
street as well as to American and Vietnames~ personnel on 
duty." 
He added that the Embassy vTaS "already back in 
business," and that he would "at once request the Congress 
for authority an,d funds for the immediate construction of 
a ne"T chancery. . 
After his first meeting vTith Taylor and other officials on March 31, 
the President responded to ~ress inquiries concerning dramatic neyT 
developments by saying, "I know of no far-reaching strategy that is being 
suggested or ~romulgated." 
But the President was being less than candid. 
The proposals that 
were at that moment being promulgated, and on which he reached signifi-
cant decisions the following day, did involve a far-re aching strategy 
change : 
acceptance of the conce~t of U.S. troops engage~ in offensive 
ground operations against 
As i ~n insurgents . 
This issue greatly over-
shadovled all other Vietnam questions then being reconsidered. 
D. 
NSAJYI 328 -- Issues Posed and Decisions 1.1ade 
The underlying question that ioTas being posed for the President 
at this time was "ell formulated by Assistant Defense Secretary John 
Mcnaughton in a draft memorandum of March 24, entitled "Plan of Action 
for South Vietnam. !I 
The key question, Bcl'Jaughton thought, vTaS: 
'Can the situation inside SVN be bottomed out (a) ,dthout 
. extreme measures against the DRV and/or (b) I-rithout deploy-
ment of l ar ge numbers of US (and at her) combat troops inside 
SVN?" 
And the ansi·rer, he believed:. vTaS "perhaps -- but 
probably no. 
To get closer to an answer, ~lcj'~aughton began by restating U.S. ob-
jectives in Vietnam, and by attempting to wei gh these objectives by 
their relative importance: 
85 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
70% - To avoid a humiliating US defeat (to oUr reputation 
as a guarantor) . 
2~k - To keep SVN (and then adjacent) territory from 
C'I:!.inese hands. 
10% - To permit the people of SVN to enjoy a better, 
freer ,·my of life. 
ALSO - To emerge from crisis without unacceptable taint 
from methods used • 
. NOT - To Ifhelp a friend, II although it ,wuld be hard to 
stay in if asked out. 
McNaughton then proceeded to enumerate some twenty-odd ways in which the 
GVN might collapse, and noted that i n spite -- or perhaps precisely 
because -- of the imminence of this collapse and the unpromising nature 
of remedial action, U.S . policy had been dri fting . 
As he saw it, the 
Iftrilemma
ll of U. S. policy I-TaS that the three possible remedies to GVl'J 
colla.pse -- (c.) heavy ·Hill-bree.king air attacks on the DRV, (b) large 
U. S. troops deployments to SWI, and (c) exi t by negotiations - - were all 
beset with difficulties and uncertainties . 
St rikes against the North, 
he felt, '.vere balked "(1) by flash-point limits, (2) by doubts that the 
DRV will cave and (3) by doubts that the VC Hill obey a caving DRV. 
(Leaving strikes only a political and anti-infiltration nuisance.)11 
Deployment Of combat forces, he believed, ,vas blocked Ifby French-defeat 
end Korea snydromes, and Quat is queasy. 
(Troops could be net negatives, 
and be besieged.) If And negotiations he sa"T as "tainted by the humiliation 
likely to follo"7." 
McNaughton then proceeded to revie"T in detail the purposes, alterna-
tives, and risks of the bombing program as it then stood, treating the 
issue more comprehensively ~Dd systematically than it has been considered 
elsel"here . 
His schematic exposition is, therefore, reproduced here in 
full: 
Strikes on the riorth (program of 'Progressive military pressure) 
a. 
Purposes: 
( 1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4 ) 
Reduce DRV/VC activities by affecting DRV 
will. 
To improve the GVN/VC relative "balance 
of morale. II 
To provide ~he US/GVN "lith a bargaining 
counter. 
To reduce DRV infiltration of men ~Dd 
materiel. 
(5) 
To show the world the lengths to which US 
will go for a friend . 
86 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
b. 
Program: 
Each week, 1 or 2 "mission days" with 100-
plane high damage US-VNAF strikes each "day" against 
important targets, plus 3 armed recce missions -- all 
moving upward in weight of effort, value of targe~ or 
proximity to Hanoi and China. 
c. 
d. 
ALTERNATIVE ONE: 
12-week DRV-wide program shunning 
only "population" targets. 
ALTERNATIVE TWO: 
l2-week program short of taking out 
Phuc Yen (Hanoi) airfield. 
Other actions: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
Red "flash poi nts." 
to imply substantial 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11 ) 
Blockade of DRV ports by VNAF/US-
dropped mines or by ships. 
South Vietnamese-implemented 34A 
MAROPS. 
Reconnaissance fl ights over Laos 
and the DRV. 
Daily BARREL ROLL armed recce strikes 
in Laos (plus T-28s). 
Four-a-week BARREL ROLL choke-point 
strikes in Laos. 
US/VNAF air & naval strikes against 
VC ops and bases in SVN. 
Westward deployment of US forces. 
No DeSoto patrols or naval bombard-
ment of DRV at this time. 
There are events which we can expect 
risk of escalation: 
0 
Air strikes north ofl7. 
(This one 
already passed.) 
First US/VNAF confrontation with DRV 
MIGs. 
Strike on Phuc Yen MIG base near Hanoi. 
First strikes on Tonkin industrial/ 
population targets. 
First strikes on Chinese railroad or 
near China. 
First US/VNAF confrontation with 
Chicom MIGs. 
First hot pursuit of Chico~ MIGs into 
China. 
First fla k-suppression of Chicom- or 
Soviet-mar ned SAM. 
Massive introduction of US ground 
troops into SVN. 
US/ARVN occupation of DRV territory 
(e.g., lIe de Tigre). 
First Chi/Sov-US confrontation or 
sinking in blockade. 
87 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
e. 
Blue "flash points . 11 
China/DRV surely are sensitive to 
events which might cause us to escalate: 
f. 
Major r i s ks: 
g. 
Other Red 
Moves: 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
( I ) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
All of the above "Red" flash points. 
VC ground attack on Danang . 
Sinking o~ a US naval vessel. 
Open deployment of DRV troops into 
South Vietnam. 
Deployment of Chinese troops into 
North Vietnam. 
Deployment of FROGs or SAMs in North 
Vie tnam. 
DRV air attack on South Vietnam. 
Announcement of Liberation Government 
in I1II Corps area. 
Losses to DRV MIGs, and later possibly 
to SAMs. 
Increased VC activities, and possibly 
Liberation Government. 
Panic or other collapse of GVN from 
under us. 
World-wide revulsion against us 
(against strikes, blockade, etc.). 
Sympathetic fires over Berl in, Cyprus, 
Kashmir,. Jordan waters. 
Escalation to conventional war with 
DRV, Ch i na (and USSR?). 
Escalation to the use of nuclear 
weapons. 
(I) 
More jets to NVN with DRV or Chicom 
pilots. 
(2) 
More AAA (SAMs?) and radar gear (Soviet-
manned?) to NVN. 
(3) 
Increased air and ground forces in 
South China. 
(4) 
Other "defensive" DRV retal iation 
(e.g., shoot-do'tJn of a U-2). 
(5) 
PL land gtabs in Laos. 
(6) 
PL declaration of new government in Laos. 
(7) 
Pol itical drive· for "neutral ization" of 
Indo-China. 
h. 
:scalation control. 
We can de three things to avoid es-
calation too-much or too-fast: 
(1) 
Stretch out: 
Retard the program (e.g., 
1 not 2 fixed strikes a week). 
(2) 
Circuit breaker. 
Abandori at least 
temporari Iy the theory that our strikes 
are intended to break DRV will, and 
88 
TOP SECRET -
~ensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
i .
. Important 
Miscellany: 
"plateaull them belOlv the "Phuc Yen 
airfield ll flash point on one Or the 
other of these tenable theories: 
(a) That Ive strike as necessary to 
. interdict infiltration. 
(b) That 
our level of strikes is generally 
responsive to the . level of VC/DRV 
activities in South Vietnam. 
(3) 
Shunt. 
Plateau the air strikes per 
para (2) and divert the energy into: 
(a) a mine-and/or shi~-blockade of 
DRV ports . 
(b) Massive deploYlnent of 
US (and other?) troops into SVN (and 
Laos? ): 
(1) To man the Ilene:laves," 
releasing ARVN forces. 
(2) To t&~e 
over Pleiku, Kontum, Darlac provinces. 
(3) To create a 16+0 sea-Thailand 
infiltration ,·rall. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4 ) 
(5) 
Progr8m should appear to be relentless 
(i.e., possibility of employing 
Ilcircuit-breaJ~ers" should be secret). 
Enemy should be kept a,vare of our 
limited objectives. 
Allies should be kept on board. 
USSR should be kept in passive role. 
Information program should preserve 
US public support. 
McNaughton's memorandum dealt in similar detail with the two other 
forms of remedial action that were then being considered: 
US troop de-
ployments and exit negotiations. 
Neither of these, however, is a matter 
of prime concern Ivithin the Scope of this paper. It is vTell to remember , 
hOT/rever, that the A}:Jril 1 Presidential policy reviei'T vTaS not confined to 
the air campaign against the DRV . 
It embraced the .. rhole pano])ly of military 
and non-military actions that might be undertaken in South and North Vietne..m, 
but the main focus was clearly on actions \'lithin South Vietnam, and the 
principal concern of Adminis tration policy makers at this time was lvi th the 
prospect of major deployments of US and Third Country combat forces to SV}T. 
Unlike McNaughton's memorandum, the McGeorge Bundy discussion paper 
of April 1 \vhich set forth the key issues for consideration and decision 
by the President~ gave only the most sunerficial treatment to the complex 
matter of future air pressures policy. - In f act, the Bundy paper mere~y 
listed a series of action recow~endations, seemingly providing little room 
for debate or for consideration of alternatives . 
The actions proposed 
amounted to little more than a continuation of the ongoing modest ROLLING 
THUNDER l)rogram., directed, uith slO'tTly rising intensity, at the LOC tar-
gets that Ivere then begirm.ing to be . hit. 
One must assume that the 
89 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
recommendations were not subjected to any searching debate "lhen they 
were discussed vrith t he President on April 2, since the "lvording of the 
President's decision in the NSAl-1 issued on April 6, noj is verbatim 
identical ltTith the "rording of the :McGeorge Bundy recommendation that 
was circulated tJ the Principals before the meeting: 
Subject to continuing revieltT, the President approved the 
follmring general frame"l'lork of continuing action against l'Torth 
Vietnam and Laos: 
vTe should continue roughly the present slmvly ascending 
tempo of ROLLnm THUIIDER operations, being prepared to add 
strikes in response to a higher rate of VC operations, or 
conceivably to slm'T the pace in the unlikely event VC slal\:ed 
off sharply for what appeared to be more than a temporary 
operational lUll. 
The target systems should continue to avoid the effective 
GCI range of .MIGs. 
We should continue to vary the types of 
targets, stepping up attacks on lines of commlli~i cation in the 
near future, and possibly moving in a fei'T ,'leeks to attacks on 
the rail lines north and northeast of Hanoi. 
Leaflet operations should be expanded to obtain m~imum 
practicable psychological effect on the North Vietnamese popu-
lation .. 
Blockade or aerial mining of North Vietnamese ports needs 
further study and should be copsidered for future opera,tions. 
It ltIOuld have major political complic ations, especially in 
relation to the Soviets and other third countries,but also 
offers many advantages. 
Air operation in Laos, particularly route blocking opera-
tions in the Panhandle area, should be stepped up to the maxi-
mum remunerative rate. 
E. 
The Director of Central Intelligence Demurs 
As has been indicated, the dramatic element in the President's 
decisions of April 2 vTaS not in the sphere of air strikes against the 
North, but in the area of the mission of US ground forces in South 
Vietnam. 
NSAM 328 promulgated the significant decision to change the 
role of the Marj ne battalions deployed to Viet.nam from one of advice 
and static defense to one of active combat oper&tions against the VC 
guerrillas. 
The fact that this departure from a long-held policy had 
momentous implications Has ,vell recognized by the Administration leader-
ship~ 
The President himself "TaS greatly concerned that the step be 
given as little prominence as possible. 
In NSJlJvI 328 his "\vis11es in this 
regard were stated as follmTs: 
90. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The President desires that with respect to (these) actions 
••• premature publicity be avoided by all possible precautions. 
The actions themselves should be taken as r apidly as practi cable, 
but in ways that should minimize any appearance of sudden changes 
in policy, and official statements on these troop movements will 
be made only 'Hi th the direct approval of the Secretary of Defense, 
in that these mo~ements and changes should be understood as being 
gradual and wholly consistent with existing policy. 
I-lhether and to what extent there was support or opposition to this 
step among top Administration advisers is not recorded in the documenta-
tion available to this ... rri ter. 
But one interesting demurrer ... laS intro-
duced by the Director of Central Intelligence, John A. McCone, in a 
memorandum he circulated on April 2 to Secretary Rusk , Secretary NcEaraara" 
McGeorge BQ~dy, ~nd Ambassador Taylor. 
McCone did not inherently disagree "I-lith the change in the U.S. 
ground force role, but felt that it vTaS inconsistent Hith the decision 
to continue the air strL"ke program at the feeble level· at "lvhich it was 
then being conducted. 
McCone developed his argument as follows: 
I have been giving thought to the paper that ,·re discussed 
in yesterday's meeting, "Thich unfortunately I had little time 
to study, and also to the decision made to change the mission 
of our ground forces in South Vietnam from one of advice and 
static defense to one of active combat operations against the 
Viet Cong guerrillas. 
I feel that the latter decision is correct only if our air 
strikes against the North are sufficiently heavy and damaging 
really to hurt the north Vietnamese. 
The paper He examined 
yesterday does not antic i pate the type of air operation against 
the North necessary to force the I'ivN to reappraise their policy. 
On the contrary , it states, :1\'Je should continue roug..hly the 
present slowly ascending tempo of ROLLTI-iG ThuNDER oper ations 
___ ,_,11 and later, in outlining the types of targets, states , 
liThe target systems should continue to avoid the effective GCI 
range of MIG's , II and the se conditions indicate restraints l·rhich 
,vill not be persuasi ve to the nVN and ,'lOuld probably be read 
as evidence of a U.S. desire to temporize . 
I have reported that the strikes to date have not caused 
a change in. the North Vietnamese policy of directing Viet Cong 
insurgency, infi'ltrating cadres ancl supp~_ying material. If 
anything, t he strikes to date have hardened their attitude. 
I have nOH had a chance to examine the l 2-1veek :program 
re~erred to by General vTheeler and it is my personal opinion 
that this program is not sufficiently severe or damaging to 
the Iiorth Vietnamese to cause them to compr9mise their present . 
policy. 
91 
TOP SECR~T - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
On the other h~nd, we must look with care to our position 
under a program of SlOlvly ascending tempo of air strikes. 
With the passage of each day and each week, we can expect in-
creasing pr essure to stop the bombing. 
This ,viII come from 
various el~ments of the American public, f rom the press, the 
United Nations and I'Torld opinion. 
Therefore time vrill run 
against us in this oper ation and I think the' North Vietnamese 
are counting on this. 
Therefore I thiIL'k. vihat vIe are doing is starting on a track 
which involves ground f orce operations "i'Thich, in all probability, 
will have limited effectiveness against guerrillas, although 
admi ttedly will re strain some VC advance s • 
HOI·rever, we can 
expect requirements for an ever-increasing commitment of U.S. 
personnel vTithout materially iml;roving t he chances of victory. 
I support and agree with this decision but I must point out 
that in my judgment , forcing submission of the VC can only be 
brought, about by a decision in Hanoi. 
Since the contempl ated 
actions against the North are modest in scale, they will not 
impose Qnacceptable damage on it, nor will they threaten the 
DRV's vital interests. 
Hence , they will not present them l'Tith 
a situation I'lith vrhich t hey cannot live , though such actions 
will cause the DRV pain and inconveni ence . 
I believe our proposed track offers great danger of sim~ ly 
encouragi ng Chinese CommUnist and Soviet support of the DRV and 
VC cause , if for no other r eason than the risk for both will be 
mlnlffium. 
I envision that t he reaction of the ~VN and Chinese 
Communists 'will be to deliberately, carefully, and probably 
gradually, build up the Viet Cong capabilities by covert infil-
tration on North Vietnamese and, possibly, Chinese cadres and 
thus bring an ever-increasing pres sure on our forces . 
In effect, 
vTe \ViII find ourselves mired dOlm in combat in the jungle in a 
military effort that \Ve cannot ivin, and from which we vrill have 
extreme diff iculty in extracting ourselves. 
Therefore it is my judgment that if we are to change the 
mission of the gromld forces, vIe must also che.nge the ground 
rules of the strikes age.inst Nor th Vi etnam~ ':ie must hit them 
harder, more frequently, and inflict greater daIDe.ge. 
Instead 
of avoiding the 1.ITG' s, ',ole must go in and take 'them out. 
A 
bridge here and there wi ll not do the job. 
We must strike their 
airfields, their patroleum resources, power stations and t heir 
military ccmpoQnds. 
ThiS, in my opi nion , must be done promptly , 
and with minimum r estrai nt . 
If we are un'tTilling to t ake this ki nd of a decision nOl'I, 
we must not take the actions concerning the mission of our 
ground forces for the reasons I have mentioned above . 
92 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The record does not show whether this memorandum ,{as ever submitted 
to or discussed 'vi th the President. 
In any event, the President had . 
already made his decision by the time the above memorandum reached the 
addressees. 
McCone, hO'lvever, persisted in his 'concern over ,.;hat he 
f'elt was an inad=quately f'orceful air strike p:~ogram and he did subse-
quently ma."k.e his vievls knO'l'Tll to the President, by way of' a personal 
memorandum and a coordinated intelligence estimate he handed to the 
President on April 28, the date on which his successor, Admiral Raborn, 
was . S'l-lOrn in. 
The memorandum itself is not available to this 1oJTiter, 
but both the estimate and Admiral R8.born I s reaction to the t wo documents 
are at hand. 
They are discussed in Section XIII below. 
93 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
X. 
APRIL 7th nUTIATIVE 
THE BILLIOn DOLLA..R CARROT 
A. 
Mounting Fubli_c Criticism 
During the latter half of l-larch and the beginning of April, froID. 
near and far more and more brickbats "rere being hurled at the Administra-
tions's position on Vietnam. 
At home, columnist Walter Lippman raised 
his voice to observe that U.S. policy "is all stick and no carrot. 
Vie 
are telling the North Vietnamese that they will be very badly hurt if 
they do not quit .•• But \'Ie are not telling the North Vietnamese ,'That kind 
of future there would be for them and the rest of Indochina if the war 
ended as we thin.'k it should end." 
Abroad, in an, empty but ,'Iell-publici zed gesture , philosopher 
Jean-Paul Sartre canceled'a lecture trip to the U.S. on the ground that 
Gallup polls i ndicated most FJnericans are in favor of the air r aids into 
North Vietnam. 
"",There contradictory opinions tnus have hardened, II said 
the reluctant Kobel Prize vlinner, "dialogue is impossible." And in a 
considerably more potent gesture, the government of Charles de Gaulle 
chose this particular juncture to renevl its annual trade agreement ,'lith 
North Vietnam and to extend Hanoi medium-term credits for the purchase 
of French goods . 
vTithin the Administration there viaS a grovTi ng feeling that somevThere 
along the line the hand had been misplayed, that somehow the mix of 
increased military pressure and increa~ed diplomatic efforts for settle-
ment had not been right. 
In late March , therefore, the President began 
to try to alter the mix. 
He began by spending much time on efforts at 
personal persuasion, talking to Congressmen and other visitors in his 
office about the restraint and patience he vras shov7ing in OlJeration 
ROLLING THUNDER. 
Evans and Nov~ ll~/ describe one of these sessions as 
follows: 
To illustrate his caution, he shOiTed critics the map of 
North Vietnam and pointed out the targets he.had.a~proved for 
attack, and to the many more targets he had disapproved . 
As 
for Conununist China, he I'Tas vlatching for every possible sign 
of reaction. 
Employing a vivid sexual analogy, the President 
explained to friends and critics one day that the slm", esca-
lation of the air war in the :North and the increasing pressure 
on Ho Chi Minh ''las seduction, not rape . If China should 
suddenly react to slovT escalation, as a lvoman might react to 
attempted seduction, by threatening to retaliate (a slap in the 
face, to ccntinue the meta:phor) , the Unic;ed States would have 
plenty of time to ease off the bombing. 
On the other hand, if 
the United States were to unleash an all-out, total as sault on 
the North - rape rather' than seduction - there could be no 
turning back, ~Dd Chinese reaction might be instant and total. 
JOILTlSOn'S language left nothing to the imagination and shocked 
those ,'Tho heard it. It made an unforgettable image. 
The 
United states was engaged in a per ~od of testing against Ho 
Chi Minh, but the e:r:ercise ';-las seduction, not r ape. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
But. despite the full use of his pmver to influence, the President 
could not stop the critics. 
CondenL~ation of the bombing sp~ead to the 
campuses and to a l{idening circle of Congressmen. 
Fram m~Dy directions 
the President ,{as being pressed to make a major public statement wel-
coming negotiations. 
Up to this time,. the official U.S. position had been unreceptive 
to negotiations, although the President had paid lip-service to his 
willingness to "do anything and go anywhere in the interests of peace." 
Past inaction he blamed entirely on Hanoi. It was, he said, Hanoi that 
,fOuld not talk peace, Hanoi that vlaS subverting South Vietnam, Hanoi 
that vlaS making it possible for the war to continue by funneling supplies 
and m~Dpo\.;er over the Ho Chi Hinh trail. 1iiashington vTaS not to blame. 
But nO"T the formula no longer seemed adeQuate, and the President began ' 
to look for a more. spectacular vray of dramatizing his peaceful intent. 
He found it i n ·three ingredients which he combi ned i n his renowned Johns 
Hopkins address of April 7th. 
B. 
Ingredients for Johns Hopkins 
Three elements combined to m~e the President's Johns Hopkins 
speech an important initiative : First,a new formulation of U.S. readi-
ness to negotiate, in the shape of an acceptance by the President of the 
spirit of the 17-Nation Appeal of :March 15, which had called upon the 
belligerents to start negotiations as soon as possible Tlvrithout posing 
any preconditions ." Here are ·the ,fOrds of the speech "Thich the Presi-
dent hoped 1fOUld satisf'y the principal demand of the doves: 
We vTill never be second in the search for ... a peaceful 
settlement in Viet-Name 
There may be many ways to this kind of peace : in dis-
cussion or negotiation "Tith the governments concerned; in 
large groups or in small ones; in the reaffirmation of old 
agreements or their strengthening withnel>' ones. 
We have stated this position over and over again 50 times 
and more to friend and foe alike. 
ABd we remain ready with 
this purpose for unconditional discussions. 
A second key element of the speech was dravffi fr.om ideas long pro-
pounded by such old Southeast Asia hands as former U.S. Ambassador to 
Thailand Kenneth Young, involving a massive regional development effort 
for the area, based on the Hekong River basin. 
This 'tTas precisely the 
kind of hopeful and posit ive gesture the President needed to put a 
bright constructive face on his Vietnam poli cy. 
Painting the picture 
of a potentially peaceful five-nation area, the President said: 
The first step is for the cOQDtries of Southeast Asia to 
associate themselves in a greatly expanded cooperative effort 
for development. 
',\[e would hope that l~ orth Viet-Ham ,,[Quld 
95 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
r· ; 
r 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
But, des'pite the full use of his pm'ler to influence, the President 
could not stop the critics. 
CondenLDation of the bombing sp~ead to the 
campuses and to a ,videning circle of Congressmen. 
Fram m~Dy directions 
the President '\'las being pressed to make a major public statement wel-
coming negotiations. 
Up to this time,. the official U.S, uosition had been unreceptive 
to negotiations, although the President had paid lip-service to his 
willingness to "do anything and go anywhere in the interests of peace," 
Past inaction he blamed entirely on Hanoi. It was, he said, Hanoi that 
would not talk peace, Hanoi that vlaS subverting South Vietnam, Hanoi 
that vlas making it possible for the "'Tar to continue by funneling supplies 
and manpower over the Ho Chi Minh trail. 1Jashington "'Tas not to blame. 
But no"" the formula no longer seemed adeouate, and the President began ' 
to look for a more spectacular ",laY of dr~.matizing his peaceful intent, 
He found it i n ·three ingredients which he combined in his renowned Johns 
Hopkins address of April 7th. 
B. 
Ingredients for Johns Hopkins 
Three elements combined to m~e the President's Johns Hopkins 
speech an important initiative: First,a neiv formulation of U.S, readi-
ness to negotiate, in the shape of an acceptance by the President of the 
spirit of the 17 -Nation Appeal of I,larch 15 
which had called upon the 
belligerents to start negotiations as soon' as possible IIvrithout posing 
any preconditions. n 
Here are ,the ,vords of the speech Hhich the Presi-
dent hoped'lvould satisf'y the principal demand of- the doves: 
We will never be second in the search for •.. a peaceful 
settlement in Viet-Name 
There may be many ",rays to this kind of 'peace: in dis-
cussion or negotiation ,\'lith the governments concerned; in 
large grou'ps or in small ones; in the reaffirmation of old 
agreements or their strengthening with'nel{ ones. 
We have stated this position over and over again 50 times 
and more to friend and foe alike. 
And we remain ready with 
this purpose for unconditional discussions. 
A second key element of the sDeech was dra,m fr.om ideas long pro-
pou,,"1ded by such old Southeast Asia· hands as former U. S. Ambassador to 
Thail~d Kenneth Young, involving a massive regional developm~nt effort 
for tne area, based on the Fekong River basin. 
This 'fTas preclsely the 
kind of hopeful and positive gesture the President needed to put a 
bright constructive f ace on his Vietnam uolicy. 
Painting the picture 
of a potentially peaceful five-nation ar~a, the President said: 
The first step is for the countries of Southeast Asia to 
associate themselves in a greatly expanded cooperat ive effort 
for develor-ment. 
,,'Ie vTould hope that l':orth Viet-Nam "iOuld 
95 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
)' 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
take its place in the common effort just as soon as peaceful 
coo?eration is possible. 
~~d the President then offered his munificent carrot: 
For our part I will ask . the C'ongress to join in a billion-
dollar American ~nvestment in this effort as soon as it is 
undenvay. 
PUld he underlined the grandioseness of the VlSlon by characterizing 
the effort as being conceived lion a scale to d .. ·,arf even our TVA. 
There was a third key element to the Johns Hopki~s speech which the 
President added almost literally at the last minute -- an illustrious 
name, a person of unquesttoned stature, to lend some credibility and 
prestige to the somewhat improbable peaceful develo~ment gambit in the 
midst of vTar. 
The President found that ingredient in the person of 
Eugene Black, former President of the vTorld Bank, a figure of high 
prominence in international finance, and a politician enjoying Con-
gressional confidence and open lines to both Democrats and Republicans. 
In a whirlwind performance , the President recruited Black just a fevl 
short hours before his scheduled appearance at Johns Ho]kins, and was 
, able to announce that appointment in his speech. 
C. 
Hanoi and Peking "Close the Door ll 
While the President's speech evoked a good press and much 
favorable public reaction throughout the VTorld, 112/ 
its practical 
consequences were meager. It f ailed to silence the Peace Bloc and it 
failed to bring the Connnunists to the negotiating table. 
It is worth noting that the President's initiative of April 7 
was in accord with the "pressures-policyll rationale that had been worked 
out in November, 1964, i-Thich held that U. S. readiness to negotiate was 
not to be surfaced until after a series of air strikes had been carried 
out against important targets in North Vietnam. 
Significantly, during 
the t wo weeks prior to the President's address, 30LLD~G TF~IDER VIII 
(the IlRadar Busting \'Teekll ) and IX (th= first ,:eek of the "anti-LOC
II cam-
paign) had inaugurated an almost daily schedule of bombing. 'Thus the 
U.S. was nOlv attempting to achieve, through a deliberate combination of 
intensified military pressures and diplomatic enticements, ,vhat it had 
hoped would result from a mere token demonstration of capability and 
resolve. 
The carrot had been addei to the stick, but the stick was still 
the more tangib1.e and visible element of U. S policy. 
Lnd the President 
made sure that this coercive element ,VQuld remain very much in the fore-
ground, when he stated, in the April 7 speech: 
I wish it were possible to convince others 'tlith'1tTords of 
what Tile nOli[ find it necessary to say with guns and planes: 
armed hostility is futile - our resources are equal to any 
96 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
challenge - because we fight for values and vre fight for prin-
ciple, rather than territory or colonies, our patience and our 
determination are unending. 
But neither pressures nor blandishments ~ucceeded in moving Hanoi. 
On the day following ~he President's speech, North Vietnamese Premier 
Pharo Van Dong published his famour "Four Points, " recognition of which 
he made clear, was the sole way in which "favorable conditions" could 
be created for peaceful settlement of the war. 
TrITO days later, in a 
telling denunciation of the President's J ohns Hopkins speech, North 
Vietnam said that the United States was us ing the "peace" label to 
conceal its aggression and that the Southeast Asia development proposal 
was simply a "carrot" offered to offset the "stick" of aggression and 
to seek to allay domestic and international criticism of U.S. policy in 
Vietnam. 
The following day, an article in a Chinese Communist newspaper 
denounced President Johnson's proDosal for QDconditional discussions as 
"a swindle pure and simple." 
To ~omplete the rejection of vlestern 
initiatives, H~Doi turned down the appeal of the seventeen non-aligned 
nations on April 19, reiterating that Pham Van Dong 's "Four Points" were 
the "only correct lYaY" to resolve the Vietnam problem; and three days 
later Peking's Peoples' Daily gave the coup-de-grace to the 17-nation 
appeal, saying that it amounted to "legalizing the United States im-
perialist aggression" and that "the Viet-Na.mese people will never agree 
to negotiations ''i'li thout any preconditions. ,II 
D. 
President's Reprise: 
Tragedy, Disappointment 
But 
No Bombi ng Pause 
The rejection of the President 's initiative had been total. 
And other Hestern peace feelers were equally bluntly tur'ned away. 
British former Foreign Secretary Patrick Gordon vTalker I"ho sought to 
visit Peking and Hanoi on a self-appointed peace mission to sound out 
both governments on the possibilities of negotiations was unceremoniously 
denied .entry to both Mainland China and North Vietnam. 
In the light of these developments, t he President made another 
Dublic statement , l13/ opening 'i'rith the words, "This has been a week of 
tragedy, disappointment, and progress. II 
I'le tried to open .a window to peace," the President said, 1I0nly 
to be met lvith tired names and slogans and a refusal to talk." But he 
tried once more: 
They want no ta]~ with us, no talk Nith a distinguished 
Briton, no talk with the United Rations . 
They ,-rant no talk 
at all so far. 
But our offer stands. 
vIe mean every '\Alord of 
it •.• 
The I-li ndmv to peace is still open . 
~'T e are' still ready 
for unconditional discussion. 
We will impose no conditions 
97 
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
of any kind on any government willing to talk, nor will we 
accept any. 
On this basis lie are ready to begin discussion 
next week, tomorrovl, or tonight ••• 
To thore governments who aoubt our w'llingness to talk 
the answer is simple - agree to discussion, come to the 
meeting room. 
'V'k will be there. 
Our objective in Viet-?~am 
remains the same - an independent South Vietnam, tied to 
no alliance, free to shape its relations and association 
with all other nations. 
This is what tbe people of South 
Vietnam want, and we "l'lill finally settle for no less. 
But this is as far as the President was willing to go in his con-
cessions to the Peace Bloc at this time. 
To the clamor from many directions, including from Senator Fulbright 
and from Canada's Prime Minister Lester Pearson, that the U. S. should 
pause in its air strikes to bring about negotiations, the Administration 
responded with a reso,unding "No." 
Secretary Rusk made the U.S. position 
clear on this, in a statement read to news correspondents on April 17: 
We have thought long and soberly about suspending, for 
a period, the raids on North Viet-Nam. 
Some have suggested 
this could lead to an end of aggression from the North. 
But 
we have tried publicly and privately to find out if this 
would be the result, and' there has been no response. 
Others 
say such a ~ause is needed to signal our sincerity, but no 
signal is needed. 
Our sincerity is plain. 
If we thought such action "l'Tould advance the cause of 
an honorable peace, "e would order it immediately, but now 
our best judgment tells us it "l'TOuld only encourage the 
aggressor and dishearten our friends who bear the brunt of 
battle. 
98 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
XI. 
HONOLULU, APRIL 20 -- Dr SE.A.RCH OF CONSENSUS 
A. 
Background and Conclusions of Conference 
By the middle of April, conrrnunications between 'i<Tashington and 
Saigon were becoming increasingly strained, as it began to dawn upon 
Ambassador Taylor that T!lashington was determined, vrith the President I s 
sanction, to go far beyond the agreements to which Taylor had been a 
party at the beginning of April and that had been formalized in NSAM 328. 
From April 8 om-lard, Taylor bad been bombarded with messages and instruc-
tions from Washington testifying to an eagerness to speed up the intro-
duction to Vietnam of U.S. and Third County ground forces and to employ 
them in a combat role, all far beyond anything that had been authorized 
in the April 2 NSC decisions. 
Ambassador Taylor I s ill-concealed annoy-
ance at these mounting pre.ssures and progressively more radical proposals 
cbanged to outright anger and open protest ,tlhen, .on April 18, he received 
another instruction, 114/ allegedly ,,,ith the sanction of "highest 
authority," proposing seven additional complicated measures having to do 
with combat force deployment and employment, on the justification that 
"something new must be added in the South to achieve victory." Taylor I s 
exasperated response to McGeorge BQndy the same day made it clear that 
meaningful communication. betvleen Hashington and Saigon had all but broken 
down and that something needed to be done quickly to restore some sense 
of common purpose and to provide Taylor with a revised set of instructions. 
It was with this background that Secretary McNamara convened a 
conference in Honolulu on very short notice, bringing together most of 
the key personalities involved in Vietnam policy-making: Chairman Wheeler 
of the JCS, General Vlestmoreland, COMUSIvlACV, Admiral Sharp, CUTCPAC, 
Ambassador Taylor from Saigon, William Bundy of State, and John McNaughton 
of Defense. 
Precisely what transpired during the one-day meeting in Honolulu 
on April 20th is not known to this writer. 
But clearly the meeting was 
called for the explicit purpose of ironing out differences and smoothing 
ruffled feathers. 
The immediate concern was to reach specific agreement 
on troop deployments; but an underlying objective ,<las to restore a sem-
blance of consensus about assessments and priorities. 
The record contains two documents that report on the results of 
the meeting. 
(1) The minutes of the meeting prepared by John McNaughton, 
and (2) a l~emorandum for the President prepared by the Secretary of 
Defense on April 21 which is a1Jnost, but not quite, identical Hi th 
McNaughton IS min'ltes. 
The differences are significant in that they 
. suggest an effort on f cNamara I s part to stress even more than did 
MGNaughton the unanimity of view that was achieved at Honolulu. 
Sections of the two documents relevant to the air war are quoted 
below. 
i-There the two texts differ, both versions are shown -- McNamara I s 
in brackets ~~, McNaughton's in parentheses ( ): 
99 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR3T -. Sensitive 
(Secretary McNamara, acco"mpanied by) Hr . William Bundy (and) 
Mr. McNaughton Land fJ met 1-lith A.mbassador Taylor, General 
lflheeler, Admiral Sharp and General Hestmoreland in Honolulu 9n 
Tuesday, April 20. 
(The minutes of that meeting follow:) 
LFollowing is my report of the meetingil 
1. 
(There was consensus that) ffione of them expec!,7 the 
DRVjVC (cannot be expected) to capitulate, or come to a position 
acceptable to us, in less than six months. 
This is because they 
believe that a settlement ,.Till come as much or more from VC 
failure in the South as from DRV pain in the North, and that it 
,·rill take more .than six months, perhaps a year or t wo, to demon-
strate VC failure in the South. 
. 
2. 
With respect to strikes agai nst the North, (it was agreed) 
Lthey all agre~'that the present tempo is about ri&ht, that 
sufficient increasing pressure is provided by repetition and con-
tinuation. 
All of them envisioned a strike program continuing at 
least six months, perhaps a year or more, avoiding the Hanoi-
Haiphong-Phuc Yen areas during that period. 
There tnight be fe .... rer 
fixed targets, or more restrikes, or more armed reconnaissance 
missions . 
Pnbassador Taylor stated what appeared to be a (sbared) 
./ftajoritiJ view, that it is important not to "kill the hostage" ~y 
destroying the North Vietnamese assets inside the "Hanoi do-nut.' 
(It was agreed) 
[They all believ~ tbat the strike program is 
essential to our campaign -- both psychologically and physically 
-- but that it cannot be expected to do the job alone. 
[TheiJ 
All considered it very important that strikes against the North 
be continued during any talks. 
3. 
None of (the participants) Lthe~ sees a dramatic improve-
ment in the South in the immediate future. 
(The) [Theii! strategy 
for "victory" (proposed by Ambassador Tallor, General Vlheeler, 
Admiral Sharp and General ~vestmoreland) LhO'.'levei/ is to break the 
will of the DRVjVC by denying them victory. 
Ambassador Taylor put 
it in terms of a demonstration of Communist inrpotence , vlhicb will 
lead eventually to a political solution. 
They see slow improve-
ment in the South, but all (participants ) emphasized tbe critical 
importance of holding on and avoiding -- for psychological and 
morale reasons -- a spectacular defeat of GVrI or US forces. 
And 
they all suspect that the recent VC lull is but the quiet before 
a storm •.. 
The documen'~s continue with specific force deployment recommendations 
that .... rere agreed upon at the meeting. 
In addition, Mc~ ~aughton' s minutes 
contain the follo1,ring concluding item: 
It Ivas agreed that tasks wi thin South Vietnam should have 
first calIon air assets in the area and that, .if at any time 
there are not enough air assets in the area to perform all 
100 
TOP SECi{ET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
necessary t ask s , more air should be brought in. 
Secretary 
NcFrunara directed t hat t his policy be impl emented at once. 
From this evidence, it seems apparent t hat Honolulu marked the 
relative dOl.'!lgrading of presst1.res against the ?Jorth, in favor or more 
intensive activity in the South . 
The key to success, it vras nOlo[ felt, 
was not to de stroy or-defeat the enemy , but to frustr ate him -- "to 
break the 1,rill of the DRV/VC by denying them victory" and, above all, 
to avoid, for our part, a drrunatic defeat. 
Thus the decision at this 
point was to "plateau" t he air strikes more or less at the prevailing 
level, relying on "repetition and continue,tionll to provide increasing 
pressure, rather t han to pursue the relentless dynam.ic course that .had 
been so ardently advocated by Ambassador Taylor and Admiral Sharp in 
February and llarcj , or t he'massive destruction of t he North Vietnamese 
target compl ex so consistently advocated by the Joint Chiefs. 
If 
Honolulu repre sent ed more t han a "shotgU11 vredding.," if it reflected in 
f act a r el atively uncoerced expression of vi e";:s, t he l eading U. S. actors 
in the Vi etnam drama must have undergone, in the intervening ",reeks, a 
reordering of exrectations ,dth respect to the results that bombing 
might achieve. 
Their vie'ds at· this point, in any event, ' i'iere strikingly 
more restrained on the bombing is sue t han they had been previously. 
An alternative --
&~d l ess charitable -- exulanation might be t~at , 
in the meanti1r.e, attention had shifted f'".com the ~ir i-Tar to the subject 
of U.S. combat force deployments, and had t hus gener ated a need to con-
centrate on i ssues, arguments and r ationalizations t hat would serve to 
promote &~d justify these neio[ actions. 
Preoccupation vlith pressures 
against the North had long been viewed as something of a competitor, 
something of a distraction, by many advocates of a more forceful U.S . 
. role in the South. 
Thus it seems logical that, "Tith t he decision to 
begin a major U.S. groQnd force commitment, the air campaign should have 
been reduced in rank to second billing. 
B. 
Interdiction i s Sur~aced 
Along with the levelling-off of t he air strikes and a reordering 
of expectations as t~ t ~e ir likely ef fectiveness came the decision to 
publicize the fact that t1interdiction" was nO"T a major objective of t he 
strikes. It vTill be recalled that LOC interdiction had become a key 
element in the U. S. t arget r ationale beginning wit h ROLLING THlJNDER IX 
(week of Ar-ril 2). 
P..fter Honolulu, vlith the prospective dee:;:;ening of 
the U.S. involvement on the ground and t he need to justify that involve-
ment in terms of "resisting l\rvl'i aggression," it seemed desira"ble to stress 
that as)ect:. of U.S. action more exp2..icitly in public. Wherea s previously 
there had been only passing reference to the fact that U.S. air attacks on ' 
North Vietnam had been aimed at t argets "associated with infiltration, fl it 
was now decided to feature interdiction as the objective of U.S. bombing. 
Secretary Rusk made first public mention of thi.s new r ationale on 
April 23, 115/ vThen he stated: 
101 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The bombing is designed to interdict, as far as possible, 
and to inhibit, as far es mey be necessary, continued aggres-
sion against the Republic of Viet-Name 
Three days ~.ater, Secretary McNamara gave a special briefing to the 
press corps at t he Pentagon, comple te ,.lith maps and photographs, driving 
home the point of massive inf iltration from the Horth: 
Now the current LVNAF and U.S~ strikes against North 
Vietnam have been designed to impede this infiltration of 
men and materiel, and infiltration ,.;rnich makes the differ-
ence beiJ,.;r een a situation ,vhich is manageable and one which 
is not manageable internally by the Government of South 
Vietnam. 
The air strikes have been carefully limited to military 
targets, primarily to inf iltration targets. 
To transit 
points, to barracks, to su)piy depots, to ammunition de~ots, 
to routes of communication, all feedi...'1g the infiltration 
lines from North Vietn21ll into Laos and then into South 
Vietnam. 
More recently there has been added to this t arget system 
railroads , higl11·,ays, and bridges which are the ' foundation of 
the infiltration routes ••• 
The strikes have been designed to increase the dependence 
on an already over-burdened road transport system by denying 
the use of the·rail lines in the South. 
In summary, our ob-
jectives have been to force· them off the rails onto the nigh-
ways and off the highways onto their feet ..• 
Supplementing the bridge strikes, armed reconnaissance is 
being conducted along truck convoy routes against ma.ritime 
traffic and rolling stock on the rail lines ••. 
These carefully controlled r ail strikes ,viII continue as 
necessary to impede the infiltration and to persuade the North 
Vietnamese leadership that their aggression against the south 
will not succeed .•• 
C. 
Political Objectives are Revievled 
\. 
Nm'l' that interdiction i'TaS being publicly embraced as a major 
objective of t he bombing, at least one high-rlliLKing Administration official 
beg~n to realize that inSufficient attention had been paid to the U. S. 
political posture in the event that the D~V became persuasled "that their 
aggression will not succeed. II 
102 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
As early as April 1, 116/ McGeorge Bu..n.dy expressed his concern that 
the eventual bargaining tradeoffs had not ~eceived the careful considera -
tion that they deserved. 
As he saw it: 
We have three cards of some value: 
our bombing of North 
Vietnam, our military presence in South Vietnam, and the 
political and ecpnomic carrots that can be offered to Hanoi. 
We vrant to trade these cards for just as much as possible of 
the following: an end to infiltration of men and supplies, 
an end of HanoiTs direction, control, and encouragement of 
the Viet Cong, a removal of cadres under direct Hanoi control, 
and a dissolution of the organized Viet Cong military and 
political forces . 
\ve do not need to decide today just hm-r we 
wish to mesh our high cards against Communist concessions. 
But vle will nee9. to. be in such a position soon, if only to 
exchange viei'Js with Quat . 
On this more general point, we be-
lieve more exploratory conversation with t he President is 
needed today~ 
LA~ril 17 
Apparently, hmvever, any exp loratory conversation that took place 
on that and other occasions failed to l ead to a clarification of ,vhat 
the U.S. and the GVR could regard as Tla satisfactory outcome" in Vietne.m. 
McGeorge Bundy continued to feel a sense of urgency about begi~Ding dis- . 
cussions with the Sai gon Government on this matter . 
Thus on April 25 he 
circulated a l-1emorandum to the Principals, lamenting the lack of progress 
tovmrd such discussions: 
We have had a lot of discussion among ourselves and with 
Embassy Saigol1 on the negotiating track, but we have not yet 
had serious discussions with the Reuublic of Vietnam. 
Such 
serious discussions are the necess~y preliminary of any 
substantial improvement in our political posture, because our 
,-Thole position depends on the legitimacy of that inde-;endent 
government! 
But v7e have had great difficulty in talking to Quat so far 
because our thinking has focused so sharply on the complexi-
ties of the bargaining problem itself: 
At what stage vTOuld we stop bombing? 
At lv-hat point and T,d th w'hat guarantees could 
we begin to withdrmv? 
What are the r eal t erms of an effective cease-fire? 
These are very difficult questions and the truth is that 
they cannot be ansilered today . 
They are precisely t he prob-
lems vrhich uill have to ::,e settled by a combination of action 
103 
'I'OP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
on the ground and hard bargaining. 
Moreover, it is very hard 
f'or us to look these questions in the eye ,'lith Quat & Company 
lest each of' us begLDs to suspect the determination of the 
other. 
It is perhaps .. mrth observing that these very same questions ",ere, 
still as difficult to- anS,'ler and as devisive in April, 1968 as they 
seemed to Bundy in April, 1965. 
But at that time Bundy f'elt that a 
diff'erent, &pproach might be more productive. 
Thus the main purpose of' 
his memor2ndum '\'7I3.S : 
... to suggest that there is a better place to begin on 
, this problem: namely, by getting a clearer and more compre-
hensive statement of the elements of a good eventual solution 
inside South Vietnam,. 
He can ani should work out with Quat 
a program "Those elements could include: 
1. 
Internationally validated free elections, first 
locally, then r egionally, and finally on a national basis. 
2. 
A broad and generous offer of political amnesty to 
all "Tho abandon the use of force, coupled with the right 
of repatriation to the ~;orth , or o:pportunities for peaceful 
resettlement in the South. 
3., A clear opportunity for the people of South Vietnam 
themselves to exyress themselves directly on the peaceful 
presence of Americans and other foreigners in helping with 
the peaceful progress of Vietnam. 
4. 
Reciprocal guarantees against any border violation 
with all neighbors of Sout~ Vietnam, ~Dd a readiness to 
accept international patrols along these borders. 
5. 
A declaration of intent to work for the unification 
of all Vietnam by the free choice of its people and a readi-
ness to accept natiomride free elections for this purpose 
if' this position is: 
a. 
Supported by the people of South Vietne~ in 
appropriate constitutionc_l process. 
b. ,Accepted by t he Government of North Vietnam, and 
c. 
Validated by effectively guaranteed rights of 
free political activity for all parties in both parts of the 
country. 
There are other elements to a strong GVK progr am, and 
closer study may well show that the GVN has already accepted 
a number of t hese positions,_ 
r.J:y' present point i s simyly t hat 
104 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
J ; 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - .Sensitive 
our o"m political po.si tion needs nOvi to be built on a clearer 
and stronger statement of objectives from Saigon itself. 
Once this stronger position of Saigon is established, the 
US could adJ. its OIoffi support and its mrn letermination to be 
guided by the freely expresged wishes of the people of South 
Vietnam. It could express its readiness to give peaceful help 
to such a settled country, and it could reaffirm its readiness 
to participate in appropriate international guarantees. It 
could also reaffirm its determination to· support the GVN until 
this program is accepted. 
But the I: strong G\,l1I~ program" Bundy had in mind clearly did not con-
template any serious 'compromise \vith the NLF. 
It was a politically 
strengthened, internationally guaranteed, Western-oriented government 
Bundy was seeking to create -- at least in appearance if not in reality. 
The grinding problem of the ultimate role of the NLF was left unaddressed 
and in limbo: 
The probability is that any such program would and should 
leave open the exact opportQnities open to the Liberation 
Front and its members in the new politics of South Vietnam. 
This is as it s:1.ould be, since this point is precisely the one 
which can only be settled by events and bargaining. 
It is a striking fact that, in April, 1968, three years later, this 
crucial point \Vas still viewed as one \vhich can only be settled by events 
and bargaining • 
105 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
XII. 
PROJECT 1·,1AYFLOTNER - - THE FIRST BOI:IBDTG PAUSE 
A. 
The BackgroUJld 
Pressure for some form of bombing ha:t had mounted steacily 
throughout April and early May. 
As early as April 2, Canada t s Prime 
Minister Lester PearsDn, on his I'Jay to meet ''lith President Johnson, 
had stopped off to ms~e a speech in Philadelphia in w~ich he suggested 
that t he President should order a "pause" in the bombing of i'iorth 
Vietnam. 
Pearson's gratuitous advice v.Jas particularly galling to the 
President because the pause h ad become the battle slogan of the anti-
Vietnam movement. 
Students ha d picketed the LBJ Ranch in Texas, 
dema.nding a cessation of bombing~ A massive tea ch-in had been scheduled 
for May 15 in Hashi ngton , l'lith academicians who lilanted vTithdravral of 
American influence from the Asi an mainland, ready to demand as a first 
step an :irmnediate end of the bombing . 
Pressure for a pause v.Tas building 
up, too, in Congress among liberal Democrats. 117/ The U.N. Secretary 
General v.las on a continual bombing pause kick, vlith a proposal for a 
three month suspension of bombing in return for Hanoi's agreement to 
cease infiltration in South Vietnam. 
U Thant had told Ambassador 
Stevenson on April 21+ that he believed such a gesture liTould facilitate 
renevTed non-aligned pressure upon Hanoi to negotiate . 
Evidently, however , the President was not impressed 'lith the wide-
spread clamor that such a gesture would evoke any resj,Jonse from Hanoi. 
He had responded favorably to the 17-Nation appeal in his April 7th 
speech, only to be ans,\'lered '\d th blunt rej ection by Hanoi end Peldng. 
The U.S. had responded favorably to the idea of a Cambodian Conference 
that v.Tould provide opportunities for "corridor contacts ll with Connnunist 
pOi'lerS on the Vietnam problem, but Peking had apparently blocked that 
initiative . 
Encouragement had been given to 3. 1JK 8.pproach to the Soviets 
in February looking to";{ard consultations under Article 19 of the 1962 
Geneva .lkcords , but no response £'rom the USSR he,d been received. 
The 
Radhakrisr~e~ pro~osal for a cease-fire along the 17th pe~allel, super-
vised by an llAfro-Asian Force ll Ifas being favorably considered by the 
U.S. only to be denounced as a llplot" by Pe-1dng and &s an lloffense" by 
Hanoi. 
Publ i cly, t he President was plaintive: 
There are those liTho :;:'requently taL'k. of negO'tiations and 
political settlement and that they believe this is the course 
we should pur sue, and so do I. 
When t hey t a lk that limy I say, 
welcome to t he club. 
I want to negotiatp . 
I vJould much 
r ather taL'k. than fight, a..l1d I think everyone would. 
Bring 
in ,\fho you '\'lant us to negotiate ,dth. 
I have se2Iched high 
and wide, and I am a reasonably good cO\'lboy, and I can 't even 
rope anybody and bring them in who is ~illing to t alk and 
106 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
settle this by negotiation. 
We send them messages t:rrough 
allies - one country, t,-w countries, three countries, four 
or five countries - all have tried to be helpful . 
The dis-
tinguished British citizen, Mr. (Patrick Gordon) Walker, 
has been out there, 8.J.'ld they say, .. re can't even talk to you. 
All our intelligence is unanimous· in this one point, that 
they see no need for negotiation. 
They think they are 
winning and they' have won and '\Thy should they sit dovm and 
give us something and settle "Tith us. 118,/ 
But while the public clamor persisted and became more and more 
difficult to ignore, the President was receiving intelligence assess-
ments from Saigon ~Dd from Washington that tended to confirm his reading 
of Hanoi's disinterest in negotiations, but that provided him with a 
quite different erg~ent for a bombing pause at this time: if the con-
f lict was going to h@.ve to be expanded and bombing intensified before 
Hanoi .. Tould "come to reaso"u,!l it-}TOuld be easier and politically more 
palatable to do so after a :Qause, vrhich vlOuld afford an opportunity for 
the enemy's intentions to be more clearly revealea. 
On Hay 4, in response -to an urgent request from Washington, Am-
bassador Taylor submitted a U.S . 1-1ission IlAssessment of DRVjVC Probable 
Courses of Action During the hext Three :r.Ionths." The assessment con-
firmed the 1{ashington view that Hanoi continued to .have a very favorable 
vie"T of its prospects for victory: 
.... Tone of st:::.tements emanating from Hanoi since fjebru-
ary and March7 indicate that t he DRV has not weakened in its 
determination to continue directing and sunporting Viet Cong 
and seeking f\rrther intensification of war-in the South. 
From DRV vieW?oint, outlook is probably still favorable 
despite air strikes on North. 
Although their general 
transportation system in North has been significantly damaged, 
thus somewhat reducing their infiltration capability, Hanoi 
may calculate it can accept level of damage being inflicted 
as reasonable price to P8,Y for chance of victory in South. 
Viet Cong forces in south retain capability of taking local 
initiatives on ground, although they must accept cost of 
heavier losses from tactical air support, and their morale 
pOssibly has been reduced by recent developments . 
GVN force 
levels still are not. 8.dequate to cone with these Viet Cong 
co.pabilities. 
De.s~ite relative longevity of Quat Govt., 
which marks' improvement over nrevious recent Govts., poli ti-
cal situation is still basically unstable. \{hile military 
and civilian morale has risen, ~umb:ings among generals con-
tinue, suspicion among political and religious groups 
persist and are subject to exploitation by communists. 
On 
balance, Henoi probably believes it has considerable basis 
,;. 
107 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
for expectation that Viet Cong, 'who were clearly ma..king prog-
ress as recently as February, can regain the initiative and, 
by the application of offensive po,,~er, can create an atmosP4ere 
in YThich negotiations favorable to the DRV can be instituted. 
Given this Situation, the report argued, the most probable course. 
of action that Hanoi would pursue is to continue its efforts to expand 
its military action in the South, "including covert introduction of 
additional PA~J units on order of several regiments. 
This course offers · 
••• the prospect of achieving major military gains capable of offsetting 
US/GVf::.T application of air pm{er . 
Such gains \·muld expand Viet Cong area.s 
of control and might lead to political demoralization in South Vietnam. It 
119/ 
A similarly unencouraging assessment had been submitted to the 
President by t he Board of National Estimates on April 22. 
In a "highly 
sensitive, limited distribution ll memorandum, the leading personalities 
of the U.S. intelligence cOrrmllLnity concurred in the prediction that: 
If present US policies continue \'Tithout the introduction 
of large additional forces or increased US air effort, the 
Communists are likely to hold to their existing policy of 
seeking victory in t he local military struggle in South Viet-
nam. 
They will try to intensify that struggle, supporting it 
with additional men and equipment. At the same time, DRV air 
defenses will be strength~ned through Soviet and perhaps 
Chinese aid. 
. 
If, hm'lever, the U.S. dee-oens its involvement by increasing its 
combat role and intensifying its air effort, the intelligence officers 
believed: 
•• 0 that the Viet Cong, North Vietn2ID, B-nd China would 
initially ••• try to offset the ne"T enemy strength by stepping 
up the insurgency, reinforcing the Viet Cong vlith the men and 
equipment necessary. 
They would likely count on time being 
on their side and try to force the piecemeal engagement of 
US troops uIlder conditions i'Thich might bog them dmm in jungle 
warfare, hoping to present the US \'lith a de facto partition of 
the country. 
The Soviet Union ••• would almost certainly 
acquiesce in a decision by Hanoi to intensifY the struggle. 120/ 
This l ack of any real prospect of "give" on t he enemy's part vTaS 
also confirmed ty "Admiral Raborn, shortly after he had succeeded Joh...n 
NcCone as Director of Central Intelligence . 
On the day of Raborn's 
. 
swearing-in (April 28), t he President had given him a letter from McCone 
(apparently \vorded along t he .li nes of his memorandum described in 
Section IX.E. of t his study) which l'-lcCone had handed to the President 
as his l ast official act. 
The President had asked Raborn to prepare 
108 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
his own comments on :McCone I s views . 
Raborn I s comments, circulated to 
Secretaries Rusk and Jl.Icr;amara on Bay 6, included the follm-ring: 
. 
Our limited bombing of t he North and our present ground-
force build-up in the South are not likely to exert sufficient 
pressure on the enemy to cause him to meet our present terms 
in the foresee ab~e future. 
I note very recent evidence which 
suggests that our military pressures are becoming somewhat more 
damaging to the enemy ,vithin South Vietnam, but I am inclined 
to doubt that this damage is increasing at a rate which will 
bring him ~uickly to the conference table. 
With particular reference to 1kCone I s recommendation that the US 
add much heavier air action against the ~orth to its planned combat 
force deployment to the South, Raborn indicated his agreement, and 
expressed his belief that such an action 1-!ould have the following con-
sequences: 
The DRV is, in my vie1-!, unlikely to engage in meaningful 
discussions at any time in coming months until US air attacks 
have begun to damage or destroy its principal economic and 
military targets. 
I thus concur vrith the USIBrs judgment of 
18 February 1965, that, given such US punishment , t he enemy 
. 
would be Ilsomewhat more likelyll to decide to make some effort 
to secure a respite, r ather t han to Lnt ensify the struggle 
further and accept the consequent risks. 
And then he added the following advice : 
Insofar as possible , "re should try to manage any program of 
expa..nded bombings in ,·rays which (1) would leave the DRV an oppor-
tunity to ex:;)lore negotiations 1-ritnout complete loss of face, 
(2) would not preclude any Soviet pressures on Hanoi to keep the 
war from ex-panding, a..l1d (3) would not suddenly produce extreme 
world pressures against us. 
In this connection, the timing and 
circumstances in 'which the bombings 1-rere extended northward could 
be of critical importance, particularly in light of the fact that 
there have been some indications of differing viel<Ts between ~-1oscO\" , 
Peiping, and Hanoi. 
:For example, it ,vould probably be advantageous 
to expand bombings after , not before, some maj or new VC move 
J. 
(e.g., obvious concentration for imminent atta~k on Da Nang or 
Kontum) and after, not before, any ctITrent pos;ibilities of serious 
negotiations have been -fully tested. 
And such bombings should not 
be so regular as to leave no interval for t he Communists to make 
concessionB vritn some grace . 
Indeed, we should keep in mind the 
possibility of a pause at some appropriate time, ,<Thich could serve 
to test t he Communist i ntentions ~nd to ex~loit any differences 
on t heir side . 
(Em:;Jhasis supplied) 
.. 
109 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
One other consideration may have entered into the President's bomb-
ing pause calculus at this time. 
On April 5, a TROJil.JI! HORSE photography 
mission had revealed the first SA-2 8Jl1.f site u.nder construction fifteen 
miles SSE of Hanoi, confirming the long-rumored shipment of Soviet 
surface-to-air missiles to North Vietnam. 121/ 
Noreover, the SM/Is 
were only the most dramatic form of considerably increased quantities 
of modern military eq"ui:9ment beginning to be furnished to the DRV by 
the Soviet Union. 
The Soviet Union vTas nO"1 in the process of becoming 
visibly committed to aSSisting North Vietnam in resisting u.S. attacks 
. 
on its territory, and a more direct confrontation of US and USSR military 
force was rapidly approachingo 
Indeed, the Joint Chiefs had indicated, 
on April 14, their desire to obtain approval for air strikes against the 
sites on short notice as they become operational, had estimated, on 
May 6, that the :first site construction could be completed by Nay 15, 
and had instructed Cll!CPAC to commence plarming to conduct air strikes 
against that site. 122/ 
A decision i n;olving a major Soviet !Tf1ashpo int~ 
therefore, '>!QuId so()"!1have to be faced 
and the President may \~ell have 
wis~1.ed to provide a ~rior opportu.nity for a quiet Hanoi backdov-Tll, before 
proceeding 'lith more forceful military activity. 
B • . Setting the stage 
On the evening of Hay 10 the President sent a personal ?L":.S~{ 
message.to Ambassador Taylor, 123/ informing him that he (the Pre~id:nt) 
had declded to call a brief halt to air attacks in the North and ~n s~ruct­
ing him to obtain Premier Quat's agreement to t he ylrul. 
The te~G of the 
message follOl{s: 
I have learned from Bob HcKamara that nearly all ROLLThC 
THUNDER operations for this week can be completed by Hednesday 
noon, Hashington timeo 
This fact and the d~ys of Buddha !s 
birthday seem to me to 'Orovide an excellent op-oortunity for a 
pause in air attacks which might go irtto next- ~Teek and which I 
c01..:' ~d Use to good effect with vorld ouinion. 
My plan is not to announce this brief Dause but sLmply to 
call it privately to the attention of Mosco,'! and Hanoi as soon 
as possible and tell them that vTe shall be watching closely to 
see "rhether they respond in any ,-ray 0 
My current plan is to 
report publicly after the pcmse ends on vThat vTe have done . 
Could you see Quat right away on Tuesday and see if you 
can persuade him to concur in thi s plano 
I would lD~e to 
associate him i'lith me in this decision if possible, but I 
"TQuld accept a simple concurrence or evell ;'illingness not to 
op1)ose my decision. 
In general , I thinJ£ it im:portant that he 
and I should act to get~1e:r ir.. such matters , but I have no desire 
to ~Jarr~ss him if it is politically difficult for him to join 
actlvely In a pause over Buddha!s birthday . 
110 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
J ; 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
We he,ve noted your [recent cablev but do not yet have 
your appreciation of the political effect in Saigon of acting 
around Bud~ha 's birthday. 
From my point of view it is a 
great acivantage to use Buddha I s birthday to mask the first 
days of thE pause here~ if it is at all rossible in political 
terms for Q.uat. 
I assume 'we could undertake to enlist the 
Archbishop and the Nuncio in calming the Catholics. 
You should QDderstand that my purpose in this plan is to 
begin to clear a path either toward restoration of peace or 
tOvrard increased military action, depending upon the reaction 
of the Comrmmists. 
We have amp:y demonstrated our determina-
tion and our commitment in the last t wo months, and I now 
wish to gain some flexibility. 
I know that this is a hard assignment on short notice, but 
there is no one ,yho can bring it off better. 
I have kept this plan in the tightest possible circle here 
and vlish you to inform no one but Alexis JOILl1Son. 
After I have 
your report of Quat's reaction I will make a final decision and 
it will be commQl1icated promptly to senior officers concerned. 
Ambassador Taylor promptly relayed the President's plan to Quat, 
whose major o"'::>jection Iyas to the notion of lin.~ing the paus e in any way 
with Buddha's birthday. 
Taylor reported this objection to 1tTashington 
12r~/ 
and received the follo'Hing additional instructions from the 
Department in return. 125/ 
We have decided here to go ahesfl commencing on Thursday 
[May 1}7 for period of approximately 5 - 7 days. 
Orders through 
military channels will "place stand-down on basis Ifin order to 
observe reaction of DRV-rail and road transportation systems!! 
and will order increase in nhoto recce of DRV and bombing within 
SVN. 
You should tell I<!estm;reland tru~ basis for his personal 
use only so that you and he and Alex Jo):1.nson remain the only 
three Americans in Saigon aboard. 
He have informed Dobrynin 
toni&ht and are instructing Kohler to convey message to Hanoi 
through DRV Ambassador in tf;oscovi. 
I wiil alsO be telling 
British and Canadian Foreign I:inisters personally tomor row and 
lye "Hill convey message to :Menzies throug~1. Embassy here. 
Hmy-
ever, each of these being informed only at . highest levels and 
their Saigon representatives will not repeat not be witting. 
You should t ~~e following actions: 
1. 
Inform Quat we are going ahead . 
You should not specify 
period but 'let us knov if he r aises question or still insists 
on as short a period as 4 - 5 days. 
Tell him 'He vTill definitely 
III 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
J ; 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
refrain at all times from associating action with Bud.c_~a' s 
birthday and that our initial plan will be to refer all press 
queries to Hashington and to hold as long as !,ossible simply 
to operational factors as explanation. 
You should raise with 
him. question of ':.That he will tell general.s urging in strongest 
terms t hat he tell them only '\'That we are saying through mili-
tary cha~~el an~ preferably delay even this until question 
arises. If Quat raises question of vrhat we are saying to 
Communist side, you will have copies tonight's talk with 
Dobrynin and instructions to Kohler by se!'tels and may draw 
generally on these for his personal use only. 
2. 
To deal 'with any possibility adverse Catholic reaction 
you should inform Archbishop and/or Nuncio very privately that 
any variation in actions in forthcoming period will be USG 
decisions not related. in any v.ray to Buddha's birthday or any 
appeal or issue cO[l...nected "Wi tll it. You may of course also 
reiterate that any such variations have no effect v.rhatever 
on .our determination as clearly shOl:ffi in recent months. 
We 
leave timing this approach to you but believe it should be 
done earliest before any speculation arises. 
3. 
At appropriate time you should instruct Zorthian to 
report simply t hat no operations other than recon...naissance 
were conducted on each dEW and to refer press queries, pre-
ferably by indirection, to ·Hashington . 
A fev.T hours ]a ter, Secretary McNamara, with the concurrence of 
Secretary Rusl\. and ~~cGeorge Bundy, sent the follOl'iing FLASH joint 
State/Defense message through military channels to Junbas.sador Taylor, 
ClhCPAC and Cm,ms,:·fACV: 12.6/ 
'In order to observe reaction of DRV rail and road trans-
portation systems, bombing (including armed recce fu~d other 
strike operations) of targets 'wi thin DRV will cease for several 
days effective 2400 12 May Saigon time. 
CINCPAC should issue 
the necessary instructions to US forces and ftJll.bassador should 
seek to obtain compliance of ~~AF . 
During the :;!eriod in \'Thich bombing operations are suspended, 
photo aDd eyeball reconnaissance flights over DRV, in . so far as 
they can be carried out v.rithout flak suppression escorts and 
within currently a~proved rules relating to altitudes and lati-
tudes, vTill. be increased to the level req,uired to permit a 
thorough study of lines of communication. 
T~e bombing sorties 
which vJOuld have been directed agc:.inst the DRV during this 
period, to the extent practical, will be targeted against ap-
propriate targets in South Vietnam. 
Ji 
112 
TOP S~CRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
ROLLIHG THUIIDER 15 as outlined in JCS 1736 has been approved. 
It is to be executed upon receiut of appropriat e execution orders. 
Press guidance for the period during which bombing operations 
are suspended will be furnished in a sepprate message. 
Acting on these ~nstructions, Taylor saw Quat in Saigon on the 
morning of May 12, and reported back as follows: 127/ 
Along vTith Alex Johnson , I called this morning to convey 
to Quat t he i nformation contained in Department's instructions. 
I told him that his views with regard t; linking the pause "lith 
Budlli~a's birthday had been accented and that this element had 
been removed from t he pl an. 
I ~xplained that the pause begins 
t omorr 01'1 (Saigon time) and ,-rill continue for several days. 
As 
he did not r ai se any question with regard to the precise dura-
tion, I did not elaborate. 
He liked the military justification 
. for the pause as explained in REFTEL and undertook to remain 
within this l anguage in dealing with his generals. 
I assured 
him that General vTestmoreland would do tne same in ·his military 
contacts. 
We explained to 
the USSR and Hanoi. 
that any detect a~le 
ing the suspension 
quat hO'i'l the message was being conveyed to 
He had no comment except to express doubt 
change in DRV conduct will t ake place dur-
of attacks . 
As for comment to t~e yr ess, he re] eated his intention to 
ward off queries by references to 1I0perational Requirements . II 
While securing Quat's support has been somewhat easier than 
I had anticipated, I am sure that he and his colleagues will 
become uneasy very quickly if this pause runs beyond the IIfour 
to five days" which Quat has indicated to be acceptable from his 
point of vie,.,. 
I 1-lould hope that our purposes can have been 
fulfilled vlithin the five day period. 
J ; 
With regard to par agraph 2 LOf Department's instructionil, 
Johnson and I feel that it is unnecessary and probably undesir-
able to approach Archbisho~) Binh or the NUJ.'1.cio at this time. 
We will ,'latch cl osely the local reaction to the suspension and 
convey the message to t he Catholic leadership, if necessary, at 
a timely moment. 
. 
_luch additional attention vias lavished by Washington upon maintain-
ipg near-absolute secrecy, preserving a plausible front vi8-~-vis t he 
press, and other aspects of stage management . 
On May 12, "tIle operation 
Vias given the code .. ;ord J·~4YFLOT;r.t;R , and all cOmIDUJ.'1.ications on it were 
t henceforth to be slugged with t hat indicator. 
Bes,i des Taylor and 
Johnson, the only Ameri can P~bas s adors informed of the political purpose 
113 
TOP S~CRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
of MAYFLOWER were William Sullivan in Vientiane, FOY Kohler in Moscm.;, 
and Winthrop Brmm in Seoul -- the latter only for the purpose of inform-
ing President Park Chung Hee who was about to embark on a state visit to 
Washington and who, the Department felt, should be fore-Harned so that he 
mi~Qt more effectively fend off press probings. 
On the evening of May 11, Secretary Rusk made t"l{O moves designed to 
inform lithe other side" of the fact that a bombing halt was being called 
and of its political purpose: 
1. 
He sent a cable 128/ to Foy Kohler in Moscm.;, instructing him 
to make urgent contact with the DRV Ambassador in MoscOW to convey a 
carefully prepared message to him, as quoted be 1m.; • 
The cable set forth 
the instructions and rationale as follows: 
•• • vle are using you as channel to avoid using Soviets as 
.intermediaries and also to insure that message is accurately 
and directly delivered. 
We leave appropr~ate method of 
arranging contact to you and are not concerned if soviets 
should become aware you are making such contact. 
You should 
of COUl'se make maximum effort avoid any attention by any third 
party. 
Message you should deliver should be oral but confirmed by 
,rritten piece of paper which you should hand to Ambassador with 
request he deliver message to Hanoi. 
Message is as follovTs: 
BEGIN TEXT. 
The highest authority in this Government has 
asked me to inform Hanoi that there \trill be no air attacks on 
North Viet-Nam for a period beginning at noon, Washington time, 
Wednesday, Hay 12, and ru..rming into next "I'reek. 
In this decision the United states Government hasJ~aken 
account'of repeated suggestions from variouS quarters, includ-
ing public statements by Hanoi' representatives, that there can 
be no progress tmv-ard peace vrhile ther e are air attacks on 
North Viet-Name 
The United states Government remains convinced 
that the underlying cause of trouble in southeast Asia is armed 
action against the people and Government of South Vietnam by 
forces ,v-hose actions can be decisively affected from North 
Vietnam. 
The United States 1"rill be very watchful to see whether 
in this p~riod of pause there are significant reductions in ~uch 
armed actlons by such forces. (The United States must emphaslze 
that . the road tm·rard the end of armed att acks against the people 
and Government of Vietnam is the only road vrhich will permit the 
Government of Vietnam(and the Goverlnnent of the Unlted States) 
to bring a permanent end to their attacks on North Vietnam.) ••. 
In taking this action the United States is well aware of 
the risk that a temporary suspens ion of these air attacks may 
114 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
be misunderstood as an indication of weakness, and it is there-
fore necessary for me to point out that if this pause should be 
misunderstood in this fashion, by any ~arty, it would be neces-
sary to demonstrate more clearly than ever, after the pause 
ended, that the United States is determinGd not to accept 
aggression without reply in Vietnam. 
Moreover, the United 
States must point out that the decision to end air attacks for 
this limited trial period is one vThich it must be free to re-
verse if at any time in the coming days there should be actions 
by the other side in Vietnam which required immediate reply. 
But my Government is very hopeful that there will be no such 
misunderstanding and that thi s first pause in the air attacks 
may meet with a response which will nermit further and more 
extended suspension of this form of ~ilitary action in the ex-
pectation of equally constructive actions by the other side in 
the future. 
EflJl) TEXT. 
2. 
He summoned Soviet AJnbassador Anatol Dobrynin to his office in 
the State Department and made virtually the same oral statement to him, 
confirmed by a parallel written version handed to him. 
Rusk, that same 
evening described the meeting to Foy Kohler in a second cable, 129/ sent 
immediately after the message quoted above: 
I explained we were not indicating any precise number of 
days, .that we retained freedom of action, ~nd that we would 
convey similar message to Hanoi. 
I also said we ;;-Tould make 
no announcement although we expected press pressures, and 
made clear our' action related only to strikes of any sort 
and not to continued reconnaissance. 
(Paper itself makes 
clear action confined to DRV and does not include Laos or 
SVN. ) 
I also said we did · not knovT what to expect but that Hanoi 
knovTs what it is doing and can find a vIay to make its response 
clear 0 
Dobrynin noted we vTere.; merely informing soviets an~ was 
clearly relieved I'Je not asking them to act as intermedlary. 
Asked about my trip to Vienna and indicated there might be 
further conversations there Saturday "lith Gromyko. 
Asked 
basically whether action represented any change in fundamental 
US position. 
. 
I replied that it did not and that this should be no surprise. 
I reviewed recent ' indications that Cambodia conference 
blocked by Peiping despite favorable mention in DRV-MoscoW 
connnunique and that three-party talks on Laos likevrise in 
115 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
-, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
abeya...l1.ce apparently follovTing Peiping and perhaps Hanoi pressure. 
President on April 7 had tried open up discourse but thus far 
channels blocked. If attacks on DRV were part of problem, Com-
munist response to present action might open up channels. 
Dobrynin said he thought we would get some answer but could 
not predict "That .. 
I underscored importance action not be misunderstood in 
Hanoi. 
Hanoi appears to have impression they may succeed, but 
US .. Till not get tired or be affected by very small domestic 
opposition or by international pressures, Hanoi cannot rely on 
Saigon instsbility. They may have wrong ideas on these points 
and important t hey not misunderstand our action. 
Dobrynin responded he saw no danger of misunderstanding but 
problem vTas to find way. 
Parallel with the Secretary's diplome.tic moves, the President made 
a major public address on the first day of the bombing pause, in which 
he made no reference to the pause , but in 'i'lhich he urged Hanoi to consider 
It 
lot' 
" 
It' 
II 
h 
' 
t' 
t ' 
fth IIthr 
a 
po l lCa.L so U lonG 
T e speech, embraclng ne 
neme 0 
Le 
- ee 
faces of ''1ar" (1. armed conflict, 2. diplomacy and politics, and 3. human 
. need) contained the following passage: 
The second face of war in Viet-Nam is the quest for a 
political solution - the face of diplomacy and politics - of 
the ambitions and the interests of other nations. 
We know, 
as our adversaries should a::"so knov, that there is no purely 
military solution in sight for either side. 
We are ready for 
unconditional discussions. 
Most of the non-Communist nations 
of the world favor such unconditional discussions. 
And it 
.. Tould .clearly be in the interest of North Vietnam to now come 
to the conference table. 
For them the continuation of war , 
without t alks , means only dam~ge without conquest. 
Communist 
China apparently desires the vrar to continue 'i'ihatever the cost 
to their allies . 
Their target is not merely South Viet-Nam; 
it is Asia. 
Their objective is not the fulfillment of Viet-
namese nationalism; it is to erode and to discredit America's 
ability to help prevent "-Chinese domination over all of Asia. 
In thi.s domination they wilJ,. never succeed. 
. C. 
Tr ansm~ .tting the Messages 
1-:)0/ 
~ 
FOY Kohler in Hoscm'T, upon recelvlng the Secretary's instructions, 
directed his De:;;uty Chief of Mission to teleL,hone the Forth Vietnamese 
Embassy on the morning c:f May 12 to request ~ urgent appointment for 
.A.m.basse.dor Kohler Hi th the North Vietnamese Ambassador. 
The latter, hOi'Tever, 
116 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
declined to receive the American Ambassador !lin vievT of the absence of 
diplomatic relations betvJeen our t,.Jo countries, If and suggested instead 
that the I! important , high level private message" froID the US Government 
which Ambassador Kohler wished to communicate to the ~VTI Ambassador be 
sent to the Sovi et Government "in its ca:?acity as co-Chairman of the 
Geneva Conference. I! 
. 
Kohler felt it '-JOuld not be uroductive to press the NVN embassy 
further, and cabled the Deuartment for instructions as to Hhich of two 
alternatives he should pur;ue: I!(l) Transmit message by letter via 
messenger to NVN ambassador; or (2) seek appointment with Acting Foreign 
Minister Kuznetsov to convey message." 1311 
The Department's reply was as follows: 
Believe you should pursue both alternatives urgently, 
explaining' to Kuznet sov (Hho will by nOvT have heard. from 
Dobrynin) that you recognize reluctance of soviets to act 
as intermediary and are asking solely that soviets transmit 
message to DRV Ambassador in accordance vlith DRV suggestion. 
13?! 
Kohler acted prom~tly on both alternatives. 
"orall! communication to the DRV Ambas sador under 
by Kohler, vThich read as follmrs: 
He transmitted the 
cover of a :etter signed 
In accordance vlith the suggestion made by a member of 
your staff today, I am attempting to reach the Acting 
Foreign Minister tonight. 
Since this may not be possib~e and because of its im-
portance, I enclose the message I had hoped to be able to 
convey to you personally earlier today. 
" 
Hovlever, though hand-delivered by an JlJUerican embassy employee to 
a DRV employee, the communication was returned the follmTing morning in 
a plain envelope addressed simply Embassy of US of A. 133/ 
At the same time, Kohler sought an urgent ap~ointment Hith Acting 
Foreign Minister Kuznetsov (Gromyko being out of town) but Kuznetsov 'Has 
not availabl e and Kohler "ras able to see only De;;mty Foreign ~Iini s ter 
Firyubin. 
The l atter, after some tem) orizing, flatly refused his 
government's seryices as an intermediary and lectured Kohler at length 
u.90n the US misl",once) tion of the real nature of the conflict in Vietnam. 
Kohler's aCCOli..l1t of the conversation foll m'!s: 13lf/ 
I informed Firyubin t ~1at as he must knov! from report of 
Dobrynin's conversation vrith Secretary, US Government has 
made decision ",-hich "re hoped vTOuld be both understood and 
not misu..l1derstood. 
I had been informed by several high 
117 
TOP SEC~ ST - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Soviet sources that decision we had taken was precisely vlhat 
was called for but none had been in position to predict re-
action. 
Our purpose in reaching this significant decision . 
was to attem:?t to ascertain if a yTay could be found to peace-
ful solution of current crisis in Southecst Asia. 
We had 
hoped vTe vlOuld be able to deliver oral communication convey-
ing this decision to DRV authorities and I had attempted to 
do so today through DRV Ambassador. 
Unfortunately Ambassador 
let it be knry~ that he did not wis h to receive me personally 
and when his embassy vlaS informed that the message I sought 
to deliver was of extreme importance, it was suggested that 
we transmit the message through the Soviet Government in its 
capacity as Geneva Co-Chairman. 
It was because of these cir-
cumstances that I had found it necessary to disturb 
y~. Firyubin tonight. 
I pointed out that although DRV 
Ambassador had refused to-receive me, embassy had succeeded 
in delivering a copy of oral corrmunication to employee of 
DRV embassy earlier this evening (2015 Local) "Tho agreed to 
bring it to attention of Ambassador (communication as set 
forth in DEPTEL 3103 then translated in full for Firyubin 
vTith sole interruption being Firyu'Jin' s inquiry if cessation 
attacks ap:?lied only to those from air - which I confirmed.) 
A:fter receiving confirmation from me that communication was 
of oral nature, Firyubin s aid he vie,.,ed communication as based 
on old erroneous conception on which US has proceeded, a con-
ce:ption "Thich precludes US recognizing that the South Viet-
namese peo~le are fighting ~or their freedom and are struggling 
against aggression and control by Saigon pup:pets. 
Furthermore 
it indicated to Firyubin that we continued to view t~e picture 
incorrectly ,.,hen ,.,e referred again to the struggle in South 
Vietnam as being organized and directed by the DRV. 
The 
absurdity of this vievr, he said, is obvious and naturally the 
Soviet Government cannot agree yrith it as it has made clear 
in numerous statements. 
Firyubin could only view' the communi-
cation as re:;;:>etition of the threat against the DRV -- nOlv a 
threat of rene'''ed and expanded aggression. 
This '"as the only 
vTay he could inter:pret 
t~e reference to the risk that a sus-
pension of attacks involved . 
Obviously we are suffering from 
a gruss misunderstanding if we think t hat such aggression will 
go unpunished, YTithout res:;Jonse. 
The only constructive approach 
to a peaceful settlement of the situation in South Vietnam '\<Tas 
to end the aggression, recall troops from Sout~ Vietnam and give 
the Vietnamese people the right to choose their OIm form of 
Government -- a choice "Thich can bp. made freely only if the 
so-called specialists should be l.Jithdravm 'and their opportunity 
of exercising influence on the Vietnamese thus removed. 
Firyubin 
said that he Ivell acquainted ,vi th the countries and peoples of 
Southeast Asia; he therefore ,{as aware and could understand the 
feelings caused by our actions there as well as the reaction in 
many other parts of the ''/Orld. 
118 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
1 told Firyubin 1 hadasked' to see him to put a very simple 
question to hL"'Il. 
Does the Soviet Government agree to transmit 
the oral communication to the DRV? 
1 said this was the whole 
purpose of my visit. 
Firyubin said the DRV embassy had not put such a request 
to the Soviet Government. 
1 must agree that for Soviets to act 
as intermediary 'between us and DRV is very unusual. Naturally 
he would report my request to his Government and if the DRV 
should request this service he ,'lould not exclude the possibility 
of transmitting the communication to the DRV Government. 
~lean­
while he "muld be interested in knm'ling just how the DRV embassy 
had responded to our approach. 
1 again described for Firyubin our efforts to de~iver the 
message to the DRV through its embassy in MOSC01;T and told him 
that the end result "Tas a suggestion by the embassy that we 
transmit the message through the Soviet Government in its 
capacity as Geneva Co-Chairman . 
Firyubin repeated his promise 
to report my request to his Government and to inform me of the 
results. 
While the conversation continued in this vein, Firyubin had passed 
a note to a Foreign Office: assistant, Kornienko, "Tho attended him, and 
the latter left the room. 
After some time, Kornienko reappeared and 
handed a note to Firyubin, i'lhich the latter read carefully. After read-
. ing the note, Firyubin said flatly that the Soviet Government "ToUld not 
transmit t~1.e U. S. Government I s message to the DRV, tha.t the DRV embassy 
had not rec;.uested this service and that it "Tas the U.S. res:ponsibility 
to find a convenient \lay of passing the message. 
Kohler I s account con-
tinues: 
1 said I ,-rished to understand him correctly. 
Has he 
rejecting my request to tr2~smit the commwlication to the 
DRV? 
He said this was a correct understanding of the Soviet 
Government position. 
We must ourselves find the way. 
I said that I{hat 1 was seeking was the cooperation of 
the Soviet Government and Firyubin's remarks indicated 
. clearly that the Soviet Government was refusing this. 
Fir;y-ubin said, 111 am not a postman" and again said we could 
find our mm >,'1ays of transmitting messages. 
I pointed out to Firyubin that the cooperation I had 
requested is a well-knmm and not unprecedented process in 
international diplomacy~ 1 had great difficulty in recon-
ciling Soviet C~vernment refusal to cooperate with its 
declaration i n support of peaceful settlement 67: disputed 
questions. 
119 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
'0 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Kornienko chimed in that he had recalled statement by both 
the President and Secretary of State on several occasions that 
the D.S. GovernJnent has channels for transmitting messages 
direct to Hanoi. 
On this the conversation ended but it should be 
noted that Firyubin made no effort to re+.urn to me the text of 
the oral communication vrhich I had handed him at the outset of the 
conversation. 
. 
. After further reflection on his meeting with Firyubin, Kohler sent 
a follow-on message to vTashington that afternoon, 135/ in which he 
sought to present the Soviet position with some sympathy and to promote 
an understanding of the Soviet rebuff in the light of the "rather 
. 
strenuous nature ll of the document vIe vrere asking them to transmit. 
Kohler's comments were as follows: 
I came away :from m:y meeting with Firyubin last night vlith 
mixed feelings. 
On the one hand, I was annoyed at the appaxent 
Soviet rebuff of an effort to take heat out of admittedly dan-
gerous situation in SK_ and impatient with flimsy r ationale for 
Soviet refusal offered by Fir~bin. On the other hand, I could 
understand, if not symnathize with Soviet sensitivity, given 
-
, 
Chicom eagerness to adduce proof of their charges of collusion 
against Soviets and, :frankly, given rather strenuous nature of 
document they were being asked to transmit to DRV. 
Implicit in l atter vie"T, of course, is assumption that 
Soviets in fact want bombing to stop, are genuinely concerned 
at possibilities escalation, and are interested in ,vorking 
out some sort of modus vivendi "'hich ,vould take heat out of 
situation \Thile not undercutting their 01'Tll position in Commie 
vrorld as loyal socialist ally. 
We cannot be sure that this is 
way Soviets view Situation, and it entirely possible they so 
confident our ultimate defeat in Vietnam that no gesture on our 
part would meet vrith encourag:j..ng response. 
Believe at this 
point, hm.,ever, \.,e lose nothing as suming Soviets have not com-
pletely forgotten lesson Cuba and there is some flexibility in 
Soviet position \.,hich vie should seek to ex?loit. 
I \vould hope, therefore, we "Tould not regard Firyubin' s 
reaction l ast night as evidence conscious hardening of Soviet 
attitude. It may simply be reflection of bind.Soviets find 
themselves in at moment. 
1'oIeanwhile, we can feel sure message 
is already in DRV hands -- copies nO'IT available thru Dobrynin, 
FirYlloin, 2nd DRV embassy here __ and I ",ould suggest vTe go 
through vii th original plan and be on alert, both here and on 
the scene for 8...n.y signs reaction i'rom other side. 
Seen from 
here, we would lose nothing by doing so; and we gain at least 
with our friends and the unaligned . 
120 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.' . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive, 
By this t:iJ:ne (1:00 p.m. March 13, Moscow t:iJ:ne), though Kohler was 
not alfare of it, the bombing pause had already been in effect for 
seventeen hours. It had gone into effect as planned at 2400 on May 12, 
Saigon t:iJ:ne, and the Department so ~nformed Kohler. The Department also 
decided, in spite of Kohler's confidence tha.t the U.S. floralll comm1.U1ica-
tion had reached Hanoi, to mru(e doubly sure by asking the U.K. Govern-
ment to instruct its Consul in Hanoi to transmit the same message, in 
vrriting, to his normal contact in the DRV. 
Informed by the Department 
that this step vlaS about to be taken, Kohler expressed his dissatisfac-
tion w'ith the character and tone of the comm1.U1ication by recommending 
that, in any resubmission, the message be shortened and softened: 
... 1 would recommend we Ehorten and revise wording of 
"oral" communication to DRY if we plan resubmit through 
British ,Consul Hanoi . If cast is present form, I think we 
are s:iJ:nply inviting rebuff, and exercise-Hanoi would prove 
as f'ruitless as our efforts in rlos cOi-T. 
Something along ' 
lines following 'iwuld get essentiELl message across : 
BEGIN TEXT. 
The highest authority in this Government 
has asked me to inform Hanoi that there vTill be no air 
attacks on ~orth Vietnam for a period beginning at noon, 
VJashington t:iJ:ne, Wednesday, Ha,y-12 fu"ld running into next 
week. 
In this decision the United Sta.tes Government has 
taken 'acco1.U1t of re:peated suggestions from various quar-
ters, including public statements by Hanoi representatives , 
that there carl: be no progress to'iva.rd peace 'lhile there are 
air attacks on North Vietnam. 
The United States GoverD.Inent expects that in consequence 
of this action the DRV vrill shO'iv similal' restraint. If this 
should not prove to be the case, then the United States 
Government will feel compelled to t~ke such measures as it 
feels are necessary to deal with the situation in Vietnam. 
END TEXT. 136/ 
Kohler's recommendation was not accepted, and the message was trans-
mitted to t he DRV by the British Consul in Hanoi in its original form. 
As in the LoscO'iv case, the message vTaS shortly thereafter returned to 
the sender, ostensibly unopened. 
As a footnote to the "unopened letter" episodes, it may be worth 
noting t~at Canadian' ICC COmmi~sioner Blair S~aborn, on an early-J1.U1e 
visit to Hanoi , 1-TaS approached by the Czech Ambassador to the DRY, vTho 
reco1.U1ted to him the story of Kohler's 1.U1successful effort to deliver 
the message to the DRV Ambassador in MoscO'lv, vrith the message having been 
returned ostensibly unopened . 
The Czech Ambassador said "everybody" in 
Hanoi knevT the story. 137 / 
121 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
D. 
Auaiting a Response 
While the Administration expected little in the 'flay of a posi-
tive Hanoi response , a "iratchful eye was kept for any signals or a'ctions 
that might suggest North Vietnamese or Soviet receptivity to any further 
diplomatic explorations. 
Such signals as were received, however, were . 
entirel~r negative. 
0:0. May 15 a Hanoi English language broadcast noted 
Western nevIS reports of the bombing cessation, terming them !fa '-lorn out 
trick of deceit and threat •• 0" 
On the same day, in a conversation with 
British Foreign Secretary Michael Ste"Tart in Vienna, Soviet Foreign 
Minister Andrei Gromyko indicated the USSR's disinclination to partici-
pate in any negotiations on Indochina . 
~nthe meantime, in Saigon, the U.S. Mission was hard at work 
trying to clarifY its mm thinking __ and that of Washington -- on the 
persuasive, or r ather coercive, possibilities of bombing pauses. 
In 
particular, the Mission was hoping to link the intensity of US bombing 
after the resumption closely to the level of VC activity during the 
pause. 
The purpose would be to make it clear to Hanoi that 'flhat we were 
trying to accomplish '-lith our bombing "ras to get the DRV to cease direct-
ing and supporting the VC 
~~d to get vc units to cease their military 
activities in the South. 
In this approach, a dmmward trend in VC 
activities 'fiGuld be "rewarded" in a similar manner .by decreasing US 
bombing. 
Thus it ,,,as hoped that , during the bO!.1.bing :?[ .. use, the DRV 
would offer the first step in a series of events "Th ic~ might ultimately 
"lead to the termination of hostilities on satisfactory IJ..e., U.SJ 
terms, without engaging in formal negotiations." 
. 
Ambassador Taylor described this anproach to Washington in a 
lengthy cable 1~8/ concurred in by Deputy Ambassador Johnson and Gen~r al 
V7estmorelarid. 
The .A.mbassador recognized that there were one or t wo mlnor 
pitfalls in the scheme, but seemed undaunted in his confidence that US 
bombing could be designed to have powerful coercive effects. 
Taylor 
admitted that: 
.A.nysuccess in carrying out such a scenario !youl{j Obvio~sly 
depend on a considerable amount of cooneration from the DRV slde 
based on a conviction arising from self-interest that the DRV 
must accept a settlement which excludes the conquest of SVN by 
1~. There is little likelihood that the Hanoi leaders are yet 
ready to reach such a conclusion but a rigorous application of 
air,attacks at a tempo related t~ Hanoi/VC activities accom-, 
panled by pressure on t he ground to compel t he VC to engage In 
incidents OT retreat ap~ears to us to have possibilities. Con-
ceivably, these ground operations might eventually result in 
herding VC unit s into "safe havens" ••. Ttlhatever its other ''leak-
nesses, such a program would eliminate in large measure the 
d~~er ~hi ch ~Te
. m~y nO"T 'be facing of equating our.J-bombing ~c­
tlVlty vO VC lnltlated i ncidents 
and of seeming vO suggesv that 
we ,.,-ill stop ~omb ing for good ir'the VC will simply lie low. 
122 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A quite different approach to a settlement i'ras proposed in a rather 
puzzling informal contact between Pierre Salinger and tiVO somew'hat 
shadowy Soviet officials in Moscow. 
On the evening of May 11 (i~e., one 
full day prior to the inauguration of the bombing pause) Salinger, who 
was in Moscm.v at the time on private movie production business, w'as in-
vited to dinner by Mikhail Sagatelyan, whom Salinger had knmm in Vlash-
ington during the Kennedy years as the TASS Bureau Chief, and who was 
at this time assigned to TASS headquarters in Moscm'T. 
Salinger reported 
his conversation to AJnbassador Kohler who related it to Secretary Rusk 
in a cable 139/ as follows: 
Sagatelyan probed Salinger hard as to whether he was on 
some kind of covert mission and seemed unconvinced despite 
latter!s reiterated denials. 
In any case, Sagetelyan, pro-
testing he was speaking personally, talked at length about 
Viet-Nam, 
He "ranted Salinger! s opinion on hypothetical form-
ula for solution approximately on following lines: 
1. 
US ,vould fu'1l101l.nCe publicly temporary suspension of 
bombing DRV; 
2. 
DRV or USSR or both would make statement hailing 
suspension as step to'llard reasonable solution; 
3. 
Soviet Union would intercede with Viet Cong to curtail 
military activities; 
4. 
De facto cease fire would thus be accomplished. 
5, 
Conference would be called on related subject (not 
specifically Viet-Ham). Viet Cong ivould not be participant 
but have some kind of observer or corridor status (this 
followed Salinger!s expression of opinion US Government 
would never accept Viet Cong as participant in any confer-
ence). 
-
. 
6. 
New agreement i"lQuld be 1;TOrked out on Viet-r~ am pro-
viding for broader-based SVN Government not including direct 
Viet Cong participation but including elements friendly to 
Viet Congo 
. In a follow-up dinner conversation bet\--reen Salinger and Sagatelyan 
t"\-vo nig...hts later, in which a Foreign Office renresentative, identified 
only as "Vassily Sergeyevich" also part2cipatf'd, the Soviet interlocutors 
generally confirmed the ~roposal quoted above, modifying points three 
and four by suggesting ttat an actu.~ l cease fire could take place only 
after initiation of negotiat~ons and that a cease fire would in fact be 
the first item on t he agenda of any negotiations. llf~j 
Additional items 
of interest were re}orted by Kohler as follOl'TS: 
123 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Soviet interlocutors talked at length about President 
Kennedy's forebearance post-Cuba period and broadly implied 
that Soviets nOlv interested in reciprocating such forebear-
ance. It Has clear from their remarks that Soviets assume 
we would welcome some avenue of yTithdravml so long as this 
would not involve loss of American prestige • 
. 
Soviets informed Salinger that Soviet Government had 
received a "Rusk proposal" with regard Vietnam but yTould not 
answer proposal or act on it in any way Qntil Soviet C~vern­
ment had some idea. as to ho"T current exercise "Ii th Salinger 
would turn out .•. 
As to mechanics of carrying on exercise, Sagatelyan 
suggested Salinger might convey proposal to US Government 
through embassy Paris and he himself would fly immediately 
Paris in order receive from Salinger there any official 
reaction. Alternatively, if Salinger wished to proceed 
direct \-Jashington, contact ·could be designated there, 
probably either Zinchuk (Soviet embassy counselor) .or 
Vadvichenko (TASS Hashington Bureau). 
Throughout conversation Soviets made clear to Salinger 
that because of sensitive Soviet position any progress 
. toward political settlement Vietnam problem must be initiated 
and carried through, at least in preliminary st age~, cn' basis 
unofficial contacts, clear implic at ion being if leak should 
occur or if scheme should go a,.;ry, Soviet Government "Tould 
be in position disaVOl'T whole affair. 
At same time, it was 
clear from remarks as >vell as presence of Foreign Office 
representative. that proposal by Sagatelyan had official 
backing. 
Salinger had one further contact with Sagatelyan and Vassily the 
follOl·ring day, 'where it became a:pparent that the Soviet officials' 
interest in the proposal had waned. 
By the time Salinger had returned 
to Washington and SayT ll.In.bassador Thompson at the State Department on 
May 18, the Soviet disinterest in any role for themselves during the 
current bombing pause had been made clear through other channels, and 
Salinger's contacts were not further pursued . 
. Of these other channels, the most important (and alsO the most 
casual) "ras a brief Kaffeeklatsch between Secretary Rusk and Foreign 
Minister Gromyko at the Austrian Chancellor's residence in Vienna on 
May 15. 
The proceedings are described in a R1;.sk cable l~ 1/ to 
U:r;tdersecr'etary Ball as follows: 
--
Have just returned l~om Chancellor's lQnch for visiting 
dignitaries. 
A:fter lunch Gromyko and I and our wives were 
at a small t ahle for coffee. 
I commented to Gromyko that we 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
were in something of a dilemma about Southeast Asia. 
lie felt 
there might be some value in a serious exchange of vievTs 
between our t "TO Governments but that vie did not know whether 
they themselves wished to discuss it. 
He commented with considerable seriousness that the Soviets 
will not negotiate about Viet-Nam. 
He said there were other 
parties involved in that situation and that the United States 
would have to find ways of establishing contact with them, and 
he specifically mentioned the DRV. 
He said they will continue 
to support North Viet-JlTam and will do so "decisively." He then 
made reference to a fellow socialist country under attack. 
I interrupted to point out that the problem was not that a 
socialist country was subject to attack but that a socialist 
country was atte.cking someone else. 
I said that American 
military forces are in South Vietnam solely because North Viet-
nam has been sending large numbers of men and arms into the 
South. 
He denied these facts in the usual ritual fashion but added 
that in any event it was not un to the United states to be the 
judge between Vietnamese. 
I r~minded him that he must knO\v by 
now that a North Korean attack against South Koreans would not 
be accepted merely because both vJere Korean. 
He merely com-
mented that there ·were important differences betvTeen those t,vo 
situations. 
He referred to Dobrynin's t alk with me and said that the 
temporary suspension of bombing ,vas "insulting." I .said I 
could not understand t his in vie"'T of the fact that Hanoi, 
Peiping and MOSCo\f have all t alked about the impossibility of 
discussions while bombing was going on. 
At this point Chancellor Klaus joined the t able to express 
great happiness that Gromyko and I were sitting together. 
Neither one of us dispelled his illusion. 
I do not kno"T whether Gromyko '-rill pursue the matter 
further "Then the four foreig..l1 ministers meet briefly with 
Q,uaison-Sackey this afternoon or when vTe all assemble for 
the opera tonight . 
Thompso'1 and I both have t he iID:nresslon that Gromyko' s 
attitude clearly mea.l1S that the salinger talk 'vas of little 
substance and that we should nOH merely consider what kind 
of signal i,re wish to get back by vray of Salinger as a part of 
the closing out process. 
125 
TOF SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I do not believe that 1,'1e should assume :from Gromyko! s 
remarks that \ore ourselves should not put to Moscow our own 
most serious views of the situation, whether they are will-
ing to discuss them or noto It is quite clear, however, 
that Gromyko wanted me to believe that tl.Ley are not prepared 
to work toward a settlement in Hanoi and Peiping and that, 
indeed, unless we abandon our effort in South Viet-Nam there 
will be very serious consequences ahead. 
E. 
Resuming the Bombing 
Having thus been unmistakably rebuffed by Moscow, Hanoi, and 
Peking, the President determined on the evening of May 16 that the bomb-
ing r aids should be resumed, beginning on the morning of May 18 Saigon 
time. 
In addition to the ROLLING THD~~ER XV execute message sent by 
. the JCS to CINCPAC on the 16th, Secretary Rusk sent messages of a poli-
tical nature to Saigon, London, and Ottawa on May 17, so that the action 
could be cleared with Premier Quat (which Taylor promptly accomplished), 
and so that the foreign ministers of the Commonwealth countries would 
be informed beforehand. 142/ 
You should see Fon Min immediately to inform that be-
ginning Tuesday morning, Saigon time, bombing of North 
Viet-Nam will be resumed by US and South Vietnamese forces, 
marking the end of a five-day suspension. 
You should convey message :from me that we regret that 
the reception of the other side to the idea of a pause was 
not merely negative but hostileo 
Gromyko told Rusk that 
our message to Dobrynin on subject was !Tinsulting." 
Nevertheless "re do not exclude possibility of other such 
attempts in future. 
There will be no public ap~ouncement of the resumption 
of bombingo 
iVhen press questions are asked , it will be 
pointed out that there have been and may again be periods 
when no bombing will take place in response to operational 
factors and t hat \ore do not discuss these operational 
. 
questions 0 
Ambassador Kohler; upon recelvlng ,'lOrd of the resumption, suggested 
that the US might i nform the KATO Council and the 17 ::lon-aligned nations 
of our actions , in adv2.nce of any resumption, to underline the serious-
ness of t he Pre~ident's response to the Unalisned Appeal. 
The Department, 
however, r esponded negatively to Kohler !s suggestion: 143/ 
. 
There vrill be no official public statement from here con-
cerning suspension or. resumptiono 
Decision at highest levels 
is to avoid any discussion Project MAYFLOHER , vrhich nOlV' 
126 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
concluded, outside of restricted circle designated when Project 
begun. 
Despite disappointing response, "rTe wish to keep open 
channel "rrith Soviets on this subject and we hope eventually ,with 
DRV via Soviets. 
We feel that use of this channel another time 
might be ~recluded if we aupear to have carried th~ough Project 
MAYFLO~mR solely for credit- it might earn us with third parties 
and public opinion in general. 
Therefore 'we would not now wish 
inform NATO Council and 17 Non- aligned countries. 
Only British, Canadians, Australians, UN Secretary General 
and Korean President Park (here on state visit) were in fact 
. 
informed in advance of resumption bombing and also of negative 
outcome of soundings of other side. 
In addition to this limited circle of allied intimates , a larger 
circle of friendly governments was . provided with Ambassadorial brief-
ings on the bombing pause after the resumption. 
An instruction to this 
effect Ivent out to American ambassadors i; NevT Delhi, Tokyo, Bangkok, 
Vientiane , Manila, \'Jellington, and Paris: 144/ 
You should take first opportunity see Pri. Minister, 
Fon Min, or other a:ppropriate high level official to imnorm 
him that the U.S. and South Vietnamese Governments suspended 
bombing against North Viet-Nam for a period of five days 
which ended on May 18. 
The initiatio; of this pause in 
bombing I'Tas accompanied by an approach by us to the Govern-
ments of the Soviet Union and North Viet-rJam. "rThich took note 
of repeated calls from that side for cessation of bombing' 
and their statements that discussions could not take place 
while bombing continued. 
Unfortunately the reception of our' 
approach '1laS not merely negative but hostile ••. In view of t he 
complete absence of any constructive response , VTe have 
decided the bombing must be resumed. 
Nevertheless we do not 
exclude possibility of other such ~ttempts in the future. 
You should add that the record of the past several weeks 
is discouraging in that Communists and particularly Peking 
appear intent on rejecting every effort from '1lhatever quarter 
to open u:p contacts and conversations vThich might lead. to a 
resolution of t he Viet-Nam situation. 
The rejection of Presi-
dent Jo~nson's April 7 proposals for unconditional discussions, 
. of the appeal of the Seventeen Non-aligned countries and of 
President Radhakrishn~n's proposal all illUBtrate the point 
together \-l:ith Peking and Hanoi IS ohvious efforts to obstruct 
the convening of a conference on Cambodia. 
Vie ,·Till neverthe-
less continue to explore all possibilities for constructive 
discuss ion, meamrhile maintaining with the Government of 
South Viet-Nam our joint military efforts to preserve t hat 
country 's.freedom. 
127 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
On the evening of Nay 18, the DRV Foreign Ministry issued a state-
ment denouncing the gesture as a "deceitful maneuver designed to pave 
the way for new' U.S. acts of war," and insisted U.S. planes had, ,since 
May 12, repeatedly intruded into DRV airspace IIfor spying, provocative 
and strafing act-,-vities." 
Communist China'~ Foreign Ministry issued a statement May 21 fully 
endorsing Hanoi's position and denouncing the suspension with charac-
teristic intemper ateness. 
F. 
Aftermath 
A still some,vhat ambiguous diplomatic move was made by Hanoi 
on May 18, shortly after the bombing had been resumed. 
It appears that in Pe.ris, on the morning of May 18, Mai Van ' Bo, 
head of the DRV economic delegation there, approached the Asian Direction 
of the Quai d'Orsay to explain the reasons for the DRV's rejection of 
the Radhakris~Dan proposals (involving a cordon sanitaire by Afro-Asian 
troops along the 17th parallel). 
M8re important, however, Bo explained 
with text in hand that the Pham Van Dong Four Point s, enunciated on 
April 8, should not be isolated from the declaration that had followed 
the four points. 
He then softened the language of that declaration by 
pointing out that the four points constituted the "best basis" £'rom 
which to find the "most justl! solution, and that recognition of these 
principles ,vould create favorable conditions for a solution of the prob-
lem and would open the possibility of convoking a conference. 
\'Then asked' if Hanoi recognized that realization of its proposed 
"principle of withdravTalll of American forces 'ITould depend upon the' 
"conclusions of a negotiation, II Bo responded "exactlY, 11 and indicated 
that if there 'vere agreement on the IIbases,11 the '\rays and means
l1 of 
.application of IIprinciples ll wouJ_d be found and in a peaceful manner; the 
possibilities were many; a vlay out ( porte de sortie) should be found for 
the US; "our suggestion humiliates no one." 
This happening, ",rhich occurred on I.lay 18, was first reported by 
a Quai official to the US Embassy's Political Counsellor in Paris 
unofficially on day 19, in a highly glossed version, making it appear 
that the DRV ~oJaS clearly respondi ng to the bombing pause by a significant 
softening of its position on IIprior conditions.
1I 
In the official version 
that Lucet, the Director of Political Affairs of the French Foreign Office 
conveyed to the DCM on gay 20, however, the continued ambiguity of the 
DRV position --
~s to whether or not recogniti)n of the four points 
remained a precondition to t alks of a.DY sort -- was fully revealed. 
This ambiguity vlaS in no sense resolved a fevT we.eks later, when 
Blair Seaborn raised this question with the DRV Foreign £.1inister in Hanoi. 
The U. S. had asked Seaborn in l ate Hay to seek an appointment ,vith Pham 
128 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Van Dong and on its behalf reiterate the March message and U.S. determi-
nation to persist in the defense of South Vietnam, to regret that Hanoi 
had not responded positively to the various recent initiatives, includ-
ing the bombing pause, and to state that, nevertheless, the United States 
remained ready "-to consider the possibility of a solution by reciprocal 
actions on each side. TI 
If the Vietnamese brought up Pham Van Dong's 
four points, Seaborn vas authorized to endeavor to establish whether 
Hanoi insisted that t hey be accepted as the condition for negotiations. 
On June 3, Seaborn succeeded in gaining an audience ",i th the DRV Foreign 
Minister ( and concurrent Deputy Premier) Nguygen Duy Trinh, ,,,ho reluc-
tantly heard him out after stating that the U. S. position was too \;[ell 
known to require restatement. 
Trinh's reaction to the message was totally 
negative, and in the exchange preceding its recitation he studiously 
avoided going beyond the vague statement that Pham Van Dong's four points 
were the "basis for solution of the Vietnam question~ 'Tll~ 5/ 
As there was considerable misunderstanding concerning the Mai Van Bo 
approach of May 18, and misleading accounts of it were circulating, the 
State Department informed several U.S. ambassadors (Saigon, Par.is, Bonn) 
of what it considered the true facts in the case. 146/ 
Facts are that bombing was actually resumed on morning 
May 18 Saigon time. 
Subsequently on morning May 18, Paris 
time, but undoubtedly on antecedent instructions, DRV eco-
nomic delegate in Paris, Mai Van Bo, approached Q,uai urgen~ly 
for appointment • . His messacre was to explain negative HanOl 
. 0 -
attitude tm-rard Indian proposal (cessation of hostilities on 
both sides and Afro-Asian force) but second, ~nd more impor-
tant, to disc~ss Pharo Van Dong's four points originally stated 
April 8 and later included in Hanoi statement referring to 
appeal of 17 Non-aligned nations .•• 
Bo repeated four points 
with slight variations from public statements, apparently 
softening language by indicating that four points might be 
"best bas~sTl for ~ettlement and apparently insisting.l~ss 
strongly ~hat thelr recognition was required as condltlon to 
negotiations. 
During course of conversations , French asked 
whether withdrm·ral US forces visualized as prior condition or 
as resulting from 'negotiations, and Bo responded that latter 
was correct. 
. 
French passed us this message on May 20 (delaying hro 
days) so that vle had in fact resumed \'Tell before we heard of 
it. More ~portant, message still left ambiguity ,,,hether 
recognition of four points remaine~ precondition to t alks .of 
any sort. Accordingly, we saw no reason to alter concluslon 
based on Hanoi propaganda denQnciation of pause, plus fact 
.that pace of Hanoi-directed basic actions in South had con-
tinued and even increased __ that Hanoi not ready to respond 
to pause and that ve must resume. 
129 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Subsequently, Canadian ICC Representative, Seaborn, visited 
Hanoi commencing May 31. 
He himself raised same questions with 
DRV Foreign Minister and response indicated DRV evasive, and in 
effect negative,apparently taking position recognition four 
points, plus some element US vTithdrawal, were preconditions to 
any talks. 
130 . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
XIII. 
DEBATE OVER BOMBING STRATEGY AND EFFECTIVENESS CONTINUES 
A. 
The Rostow "Victory" TheSis 
With the resumption of the bombing at 0600 on 18 May (Saigon time), 
the arguments over the usefulness and intensity of the U.S. air attacks 
against the North were taken up again with full energy • 
. 
ROU,ING THUNDER XV (week of 18-24 May) was designed to attack 
principally fixed military installations, while continuing the interdiction 
of LOC's south of the 20th parallel. 
The attacks were carried out with a 
weight of effort similar to the pre-pause level, i.e., 40 sorties per day, 
with a maximum of 200 sorties for the entire week. 147/ 
It was at this time that Walt W. Rostow, then State Department 
Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, floated a memorandum 
entitled "Victory and Defeat in Guerrilla Wars: The Case of South Vietnam,ft 
148/ in which he argued that a clear-cut victory for the U.S. in Vietnam 
~ 
a possibility and that what it required mainly was more pressure on the 
North and effective conduct of the battle in the South. 
Bostow's memo 
follows: 
In the press, at least, there is a certain fuzziness about the pos-
o ibility of clear-cut Victory in South Viet-Nam; and the President's 
statement that a military Victory is impossible is open to misinter-
pretation. 
1. 
Historically, guerrilla wars have generally been lost ~ won 
cleanly: Greece, China mainland, North Viet-Nam, Malaya, Philippines. 
Laos in 1954 was an exception, with two provinces Granted the Com-
. munists and a de facto split imposed on the country • . 
2. 
In all the cases won by Free World forces, there was a phase 
when the guerrillas commanded a good part of the countryside and, in-
deed, placed Athens, Kuala Lumpur, and Manila under something close to 
siege. 
They failed to win because all' the possible routes to guerrilla 
victory were closed and, in failing to win, they lost. 
They finally 
gave up in discouragement. 
The routes to victory are: 
a) Mao Stage Three: going to all-out conventional war and 
~inning as in China in 1947-49; 
b) Political collapse and takeover: North Viet-Nam; 
c) Political collapse and a coalition government in which 
the Communists get control over the security machinery; that is, army 
and/or police. 
This has been an evident Viet Cong objective in this 
131 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
war; but the nearest precedents are Eastern ~opean takeovers after 
1945 , rather than guerrilla >-lar cas es • 
d) Converting the bargaining pressure generated by the guer-
rilla forces into a partial Victory by sp l.i tting the country: Laos. 
Also, in a sense, North Viet-Nam in 1954 and the Irish Rebellion after 
the First World Wfir. 
3. 
If we succeed in blocking these four routes to victory, dis-
couraging the Communist force in the South, and making the continuance 
of the war sufficiently costly to the North there is no reason we 
cannot win as clear a victory in South Viet-Nam as in Greece, Malaya, 
and the Philippines. 
Unless political morale in Saigon collapses and 
the ARVN tends to break up, case c), the most realistic hope of the VC, 
should be avoidabl e. This danger argues for more rather than less 
pressure on the North, while conducting the battle in the South in 
such a way as to make VC hopes of military and political progress wane. 
4. 
The objective of the exercise is to convince Hanoi that its 
bargaining position is being reduced with the passage of time; for, 
even in the>wrst case for Hanoi it wants some bargaining position 
(rather than simpl y dropping the'war) to get U.S. forces radically 
reduced in South Viet-Nam and to get some minimum f ace-saving formula 
for the VC. 
5. 
I believe Hanoi·understands its dilemma well. 
As of early 
February it saw a good chance of a <lui te clean victory via rout'e c). 
It now is staring at <luite clear-cut defeat, with the rising U.S. ' 
strength and GVN morale in the South and rising costs in the North. 
That readjustment in prospects is painful; and they won't) in my view, 
accept its conse<luences unl ess they are convinced time has ceased to 
be their friend, despite the full use of their assets on the ground 
in South Viet-Nam, in political warfare around the world, and in 
diplomacy. 
6. 
Their last and best hope will be) of course) that if they 
end the war and get us out, the political, social, and economic situa-
tion in South Viet-nam -will deteriorate in such a way as to permit 
Communist political t akeover, with or without a revival of guerrilla 
warfar e. It is in this phase that we will have to consolidate, with 
the South Vietnamese, a Victory that is nearer our grasp than we 
(but not Hanoi) may think. 
Rostow had J ong been a strong bombing advocate, and an outspoken 
proponent of air attack on elements of the North Vietnamese industrial tar-
get system. 
As early as April I, 149/ he had expressed a conviction t hat 
Hanoi attaches a high premium to the maintenance of its industri al estab-
lishment and that the optimum U.S. bombing objective should be. not the 
132 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
destruction, but the paralysis of the DRV's industrial and urban life. 
By 
taking out all the major electric power stations) he believed) Hanoi would 
be presented "with an immediate desparate economic) social) and political 
problem which could not be evaded." 
. 
In the May memorandum, however, he was not confining his confident 
expertise to the spher~ of targeting strategy, but extending it to the much 
larger sweep of the U.S. policy objectives in Vietnam. 
Rostow's grand 
historic perspective of the road to victory) unfortunately, never focused 
down upon the nagging practical problem of how the U.S. might "make VC 
hopes of military and political progress vane" when compelled to fight in 
behalf of a long-besieged, teetering GVN that was ) 'by this time, hopelessly 
incapable of coping with the military and political tasks required of it. 
The critical problem of how to preserve and restore political effectiveness 
in the GVN never engaged Rostow's serious attention nor, for that matter) 
that of his contemporaries in the administration. 
B. 
"ARC LIGHT" Comes to South Vietnam __ Attacks on the North Edge 
Upward 
In line with the Aprii decision to give priority to South Vietnam 
over North Vietnam in the employment of U.S. air power) a major administra-
tion decision was taken after the bombing pause to assign saturation bomb-
ing missions in the South to SAC B- 52 bombers which had long been alerted, 
but never used) to attack North Vietnam. 
General Westmoreland, with Ambas-
sador Taylor's political endorsement presented his case to CINCPAC in the 
following terms: 150/ 
' 
1. 
During recent months firm intelligence has been collected using 
all possible sources which confirms existence of variOUS' VC headquarters 
complexes and troop concentrations in RVN. 
Each of these targets 
(COSVN) NAJ®O, Military Region Hqs, VC battalions in jungle assembly 
areas) etc,) is spread over a relatively large area and consists of 
groups of buildings or huts, foxholes, trenches, tunnels, etc., connected 
by trails. General topography is more suitable for area carpet bombing 
than for pinpoint tactical fighter weapon delivery. 
In most areas two 
and three canopy jungle growth hides surface target. 
Even if accurate 
coordinates fixed on maps (with inherent map inaccuracies) or photos, 
solid jungle canopy provides few reasonable aiming points for delivery 
aircraft. 
2. 
Operation Black Virgin 1 on 15 April 1965 waS an attack on 
the military component of the Central Office South Vietnam (COSVN)) 
(the main VC military headquarters). 
443 sorties were applied against 
an area of approximately 12 square kilometers, dropping approximately 
. 900 tons of ordnance. 
As a result of this effort, the existence of 
the target complex was confirmed by the uncovering of over .100 buildings 
133 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and the occurrence of several large secondary explosions. 
We have 
determined that the attack created a drastic effect within the VC 
military headquarters. 
Individual components were disrupted for 
several days, and even though these components now appear to be 
functioning again) they have not re-assembled into an integrated head-
quarters com~lex as they were before the a~tack. In spite of the 
apparent success of the attack we still have no information concerning 
the number of casualties caused and have only fragmentary information 
. concerning other damage accomplished. 
3. 
During the attack the target area became completely covered 
by smoke and resulting bomb pattern was spotty. 
BDA photography shows 
that as a result, the distribution of bombs throughout the target was 
poor. 
Some areas received a heavy concentration of bomb impacts while 
other parts of the target area received no hits. If an attack could 
have been launched in which the bombs were evenly distributed, results 
would have been far mOre effective. 
An attack compressed into a 
. shorter period of time would also have been much more likely to kill 
VC before they could evacuate the area and would have allowed grolmd 
troops to enter the area the same day. 
4. 
It is essential that we keep these selected VC headquarters 
arid units under attack. 
We are developing target information on the 
headquarters of the 325th PAVN Division Headquarters Military Region 
V and Headquarters Military Region VII ~here current reports indicated 
a large VC troop build-up. 
We know from interrogation of VC captives 
and from agent reports that VC fear air attacks. 
We also know that 
their plans can be upset by unexpected events. 
The bes~ way for us 
to keep them off balance and prevent large-scale VC attacks is to keep 
them under constant pressure in their base areas. 
5. 
Continued use of tactical fighters for pattern bombing does 
not get the job done properly; it diverts them from other important 
work for which they are better suited" it creates an unacceptable 
. 
drain on ordnance assets; and it disr~pts all SEA air pro~ams ~n and 
out of co~try. We will, of course, continue to use ta~tlcal flghters 
as the maJor punch against tactical tar~ets which constltute the vast 
majority of the in-country air requirem~nts) but for .'1ttacks on VC 
base areas, we must prOVide a capability vlhich will permit us to 
deliver a well planned pattern of bombs over large areas and prefer-
ably within a short period of time. 
6. 
The problem has been discussed with representatives of the 
Strategic Air Command and believe that their conventional bombing 
tactics basel on pattern bombing technique; are ideally suited to 
meet this requirement. 
I strongly recommend, therefore, that as a " 
matter of urgency, we be authorized to employ SAC B-52 aircraft agalnst 
selected area targets in RVN ••• 
134 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Washington first authorized the use of ARC LIGHT B-52 forces for radar 
photography over target areas in the Kontum and War Zone D regions on May 17· 
~ A month later, despite the misgivings of the Air Staff and the SAC 
commander, the first B-52 bombing raid was authorized (ARC LIGHT I, June 18, 
1965) attacking the War Zone D VC stronghold near Saigon. 
On July 4 and 7 
further attacks were undertaken, and ARC LIGHT became a regular bombing 
program in South Vietna~ • 
. As the weight of air attacks increased significantly in South Vietnam, 
there was also some rise in the level of air strikes in the North. 
Combined 
U.S.-VNAF combat sorties totaled about 3,600 in April, 4,000 in May, and 
4,800 in June. 
USAF aircraft flew less than half the mission. 
But an 
analysis by JCS Chairman Wheeler on 4 April and another by the CIA and th~ 
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) early in July showed that the strikes had 
not reduced appreciably North Vietnam's ·ability to defend its homeland, 
train its forces, and infiltrate men and supplies into South Vietnam and 
Laos. 152/ 
But this riSing level of attacks did not satisfy the Air Staff. 
At -the 
end of June, General McConnell continued to stress the need for more air 
pressure on HanOi, saying he was: 
more convinced than ever that these ~ii7 operations cannot be.divorced 
from and are the essential key to the eventual defeat of the Vlet Congo 
In November 1964 ••• LthiJ Jr.S unanimously agreed that direct, deciSive, 
action against the DRV was needed irmnediately. This course of 
. 
action was not adopted and intelligence reports indicate that the cur-
rent air strike program, while inconveniencing the DRV had done little 
to curtail or destroy their will and capability to support the insur-
gency, largely due to the restraints on the air strike program. 
In 
fact, the restraints have provided the DRV with the incen~ive . and 
opportunity to strengthen both their offensive and defensive capabili-
ties. 
So {th!7 ciS USAF considers an intensified application of air power 
against key industrial and military targets in North Vietnam essential 
to the result desired. 
During the period of time required to intro-
duce more forces, any build-up of and support for the Viet Cong 
offensive should be denied •••• Failing this, more seriouS difficulties 
and casualties for U.S. and allied troops can be expected. 
McConnell urged again that the Air Force be allOi-red to strike targets 
in the 94 target list, as well as others. 153/ 
C. 
McNamara. Reviews the Program 
At the end of July, in response to a Presidential request, 
Secretary McNamara undertook a review and evaluation of the bombing program 
135 
Tbp SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET' - Sensitive 
against North Vietnam. 
The results of this review were forwarded to the 
President in a memorandum, dated July 30, 1965. 
Since it represents an 
effective wrap-up, the memorandum is reproduced in full. 
1. 
Rationale for bombing the North. 
The program of bombing RVN 
began in an atmosphere of reprisaL 
We had had the August Tonkin Gulf 
, episode; we had apsorbed the November 1 attack on Bien Hoa Airfield 
and the Christmas Eve bombing of the Brinks Hotel in Saigon. 
The 
attacks at U.S. installations at Pleiku on February 7 and Qui Nhon on 
February 10 were the immediate causes of the first strikes against 
North Vietnam. 
The strike following Pleiku "ras announced as a 
Iresponse l 
__ a Ireprisalf; our strike following Qui Hhon was called 
a response to more generalized VC terrorism. 
The major purposes of 
the bombing program, however, were: 
a. 
To promote a settlement. 
The program was designed (1) 
to influence the DRV to negotiate (explicitly or otherwise), and (2) 
to provide us with a bargaining counter YTithin negotiations. 
b. ' To interdict infiltration. 
The program was calculated 
to reduce the flow of men and supplies from the North to the South 
at the least, to put a ceiling on the size of war that the ,enemy 
could wage in the South. 
LAuthor1s Note: 
This is not entirely 
accurate; interdiction did not become a program rationale within the 
Administration until late March 
and publicly not until late April 
(see Sections VIII and XI.B.ll 'Supplemental purposes of the program 
were (c) to demonstrate to South Vietnam' North Vietnam and the world 
the U.S. commitment to see this thing th~ough, (d) to raise morale in 
South Vietnam b,y punishing North Vietnam, the source of the suffering 
in the South, and (e) to reduce criticism of the Administration from 
advocates of a bombing program. 
2. 
Achievement of major purposes. 
The potential targets, 
targets struck and per cent of destruction are shOl-ffi at Tab A. 
In 
terms of the purposes of the program, its results have been as 
follows: 
a. 
To promote a settlement. 
Obviously, this objective has 
not yet been attained. 
We recognized at the start of the prograTI, as 
we do now, that the influence of the bombing on a settlement would not 
be great until the North Vietnamese had been disappointed in their 
hopes for a quick military success in the South. 
There is no doubt 
that the bombing program has become an important counter in the cur-
rent tacit and explicit bargaining process and will be an important 
counter in any future bargaining. 
b. 
To interdict infiltration. It is believed that regu-
lar North Vietnamese units now in South Vietnam (estimated to be one 
136 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREl' - Sensitive 
division) require about 4 tons of supplies daily for the 'current' 
level of combat but would require 67 tons of supplies daily for 
'light' combat. 
('Current' levels are operations conducted l~rgely 
in small units; 'light' cQmbat would involve larger elements in action 
on the avera.~e of every third day, with expenditures of one-third of 
each unit's basic load of ammunition on each action.) It is believed 
that regular Nort~ Vietnamese units and Pathet Lao forces in the Laos 
Panhandle require about 21 and 51 tons daily respective~y for the two 
levels of combat. 
Viet Cong arms, ammunition and other supply require-
ments are estimated at 8 tons daily for 'current' combat and 115 tons 
for 'light' combat. 
The effect of the interdiction program on the 
movement of supplies is summarized below: 
The 440-ton per day rail traffic from Hanoi south to Vinh has been 
cut off at Ni~~ Binh (40 miles south of Hanoi). 
Supplies still move 
by sea and over the parallel highway system. . The latter has been badly 
damaged and is subject to armed reconnaissance; sea traffic into SVN 
is under surveillance. 
At a minimum, supply is slover and less regular 
and delivered at increased cost in resources and energy expended. 
Roads into Laos have been subjected to similar interdiction and armed 
recce. 
Only limited interdiction has been imposed on the key rail and 
road net northwest of HanOi, and none on the railway net northeast of 
Hanoi; and port destruction has been minimal. 
Thus, substantially 
uninterrupted supply continues from China by rail into Hanoi and by 
sea into Haiphong to meet major North Vietnamese military, industrial 
and civilian needs. 
The effect of the bombing on military operations is estimated to 
have been as follows: 
(1) For regular North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces. 
The interdiction program has caused North Vietnam increasing diffi-
culty in supplying their units in Laos and South Vietnam. 
Hov severe 
this difficulty is or how stretched North Vietnam's supply capabili-
ties are cannot be esti.mated precisely. 
Our interdiction efforts may 
have either prevented or deterred the North from sending more troops 
than they already have. 
The interdiction programs in North Vietnam 
and Laos also may have influenced a Communist decision to forego a 
1965 offensive in Laos. 
(2) For Viet Cong forces. 
Because the VC require signifi-
cantly less infiltrated arms and amr~mition and other supplies than 
do the North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces, the interdiction program 
probably has had less of a...n adverse effect. on their operations. 
By 
raising VC fears concerning adequacy of supplies, hovever, the program 
may have caused the VC summer offensive to be less intense, aggressive 
and unrelenting than it would otherwise have been. 
137 
TOP SECREl' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
It should be noted that the program has not been a 'strategic' bombing 
pIDgram; it has been limited to selected targets of fairly direct ,mili-
tary relevance. 
Populations and targets such as dikes and basic industries 
have not been struck. Furthermore, the immediate vicinities of Hanoi and 
Haiphong have been avoided, partly because the targets there are 
primarily of the 'strategic' type and partly because strikes there would 
involve even more serious risks of confrontations with the Soviet Union 
and China. 
3. 
Other effects of the program. 
a. 
Deterrence of VC terrorism. There is no evidence that 
strikes against North Vietnam have affected one way or another the 
level or kind of VC incidents of terror in South Vietnam. 
b. 
Morale in South Vietnam. 
Morale in South Vietnam was 
raised by the initiation of the bombing program (as) later, by the de-
ployment of additional troops). 
Now __ with the bombing programs having 
become commonplace and with the failure of the situation to improve -- , 
morale in South Vietnam is not discernibly better than it was before 
the bombing program began. 
In a sense, South Vietnam is now 'addicted' 
to the program; a permanent abandonment of the program would have a 
distinct depreSSing effect on morale in South Vietnam. 
c. 
Reduction of criticism of the Administration. 
Some 
critics" who advocated bombing, were silenced; others are now as vocal 
or more vocal because the program has been too limited for their taste. 
The program has generated a new school of criticism among liberals and 
'peace' groups, whose activities' have been reflected especially in 
teach-ins and newspaper criticisms. 
d.' 
Damage to peaceful image of the US . 
The price paid for 
improving our image as a guaraI2tor has been damage to oUr image as a 
country which eschews armed attacks on other nations. 
The hue and cry 
correlates with the kind of weapons (e.g.) bombs vs. napalm), the kind 
of targets (e.g.) bridges vs. people), the location of targets (e.g., 
south vs. north), and not least the extent to 'VThich the critic feels 
, threatened by Asian communism (e.g.) Thailand vs. the UK). 
Further-
more, for a given level of bombing the hue and cry is less now than it 
was ,earlier, perhaps to some exten~ helped by Communist intransigence 
toward discussions. 
The objection to our 'warlike' image and the 
approval of our fulfilling our commitments competes in the minds of 
many nations (and individuals) in the world) producing a schizophrenia. 
Within such ellied countries as UK and JaDen popular antagonism to 
the bombings per se, fear of escalation a,;,d ~elief that the bombings 
are the main obstacle to negotiation) have created political problems 
for the governments in their support of US policy. 
138 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TGP SECRET - Sensitive 
e. 
Pressures to settle. More countries are now, as a con-
sequence of the bombing program, more interested in taking steps to 
help bring the war to an end. 
f. 
Impact on US-Soviet detente. 
The bombing program --
because it appears to reject the policy of 'peaceful co-eXistence,' 
because it involv~s an attack on a 'fellow socialist country,' 
because the Soviet people have vivid horrible memories of air bombing, 
because it challenges the USSR as she competes with China for leader-
ship of the Communist world, and because US and Soviet arms are now 
striking each other in North Vietnam -- has strained the US-Soviet 
detente, making constructive arms-control and other cooperative 
programs more difficult. 
How serious this effect will be and whether 
the detente can be ' revived depend on how far we carry our military 
actions against the North and how long the campaign continues. 
At 
the same time, the bombing program offers the Soviet Union an oppor-
tunity to playa role in bringing peace to Vietnam, by gaining credit 
for persuading us to terminate the program. 
There is a chance that 
the scenario could spin out this way; if so, the effect of the entire 
experience on the US-Soviet detente could be a net plus. 
g. 
Risk of escalation. 
The bombing program -- especially as 
strikes move toward Hanoi and toward China and as encounters with 
Soviet/Chinese SAMs/MIGs occur-- may increase the risk of escalation 
into a broader war. 
4. ' The future of the program. 
Even TJith hindsight) I believe the 
decision to bomb the DRV was wise and I believe the program should be 
continued. 
The .future program should: 
.a. 
Emphasize the threat. It should be structured to 
capitalize on fear of future attacks . 
At any time, 'pressure' on the 
DRV depends not upon the CLrrrent level of bombing but rather upon the 
credible threat of future destruction which can be avoided by agreeing 
to negotiate or agreeing to some settlement in negotiations. 
b. . 
Minimize the loss of DRV 
I face. ' 
The program should 
be designed to make it politically easy for the DRV to enter negotia-
tions and to make concessions during negotiations. It may be politic-
ally easier for North Vietnam to accept negotiations and/or to make 
concessions at a time when bombing of their territory is not currently 
taking place. 
c. 
Optimize interdiction vs. political costs. 
Interdic-
tion should be carried out so as to maximize effectiveness and to 
minimize the political reperc11ssions from the methods used. 
Physical-
ly, it makes no difference i-lhether a rifle is interdicted on its way 
139 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - Sensitive 
into North Vietnam, on its wa~ out of North Vietnam, in Laos or in 
South Vietnam. 
But different amounts of effort and different political 
prices may be paid depending on how and where it is done. 
The critical 
variables in this regard are (1) the type of targets struck (e.g., 
port facilities involving civilian casualties vs. isolated bridges), 
(2) type of aircraft (e.g., B-52s vs. F-1J5s), (3) kind of weapons 
(e.g., napalm vs. ordinary bombs ), (4) location of target (e.g., 
in Hanoi vs. Laotian border area), and (5) the accompanying 
declaratory policy (e.g., unlimited vs. a defined interdiction zone). 
d. 
Coordinate \"ith other influences on the DRV. 
So long 
as full victory in the South appears likely" the effect of the bombing 
program in promoting negotiations or a settlement will probably be 
small. 
The bombing program now and later should be designed for its 
influence on the DRV at that unknown time when the DRV becomes more 
optimistic about what they can achieve in a settlement acceptable to 
us than about what they can achieve by continuation of the war. 
e. 
Avoid undue risks and costs. 
The program shouJd avoid 
bombing \"hich runs a high risk of escalation into war with the Soviets 
or China and which is likely to appall allies and friendS. 
140 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
FoarNarES 
1. 
SCSM 460-61+, 30 May 1964, TOP SECRET; JCS 2343/383-2, 24 August 1964, 
TOP SECRET. 
(Subsequently, of course, the list grew to comprise 
many hundreds of targets.) 
2. 
SCSM 746-64, 26 August 1965, TOP SECRET; CM 124-64, 9 September 1964, 
TOP SECRET. 
3. 
These recommendations were made orally to the SecDef on 1 November, 
and subsequently formalized in JCSM 933-64, 4 November 1964, TOP SECRET. 
4. 
Draft NSAM on Southeast Asia, 29 November 1964, TOP SECRET. 
5. 
JCSM 955-64, 14 November 1964, TOP SECRET; and ·JCSM 982-64,23 November 
1964, TOP SECRET. 
6. 
See JCS 2339/164, 12 December 1964, TOP SECRET. 
7. 
In this connection, it may be noted that the small expansion of the 
U.S. military contingent in South Vietnam that occurred during 1964, 
from 16,000 to 23,000 men, did not take place until after the election . . 
8. 
A U.S. officers' billet in the heart of Saigon which was bombed by the 
VC with the loss of two Americans killed and 63 injured. It was pre-
cisely the type of incident which seemed to fall within the Phase I 
guidelines as to what would justify a reprisal. 
The JCS recommended 
such a reprisal (JCSM 1076-64 24 December 1964, TOP SECRET), but the 
timing was unpropitious--with'Saigon in the throes of a political 
crisis and Washington disinclined to launch a reprisal strike on a 
Christmas day. 
9. 
JCSM 1074-64, 24 December 1964, TOP SECRET. 
10. 
Jacob Von Staaveren, USAF Plans and Operations in Southeast Asia 1965 
October, 1966, pp. 1-2 (TOP SECRET . 
ll. 
Memorandum for the Secretary from William P. :sundy, Subject: 
"Notes 
on the South Vietnamese Situation and .Alternatives," dated January 6, 
1965 (TOP SECRET). 
12. 
Cut and Paste of McNaughton Ideas (from draftS August 1964 to February 
1965) --ItAction for South Vietnam,1t TOP SECRET. 
13. 
1 October 1:.;64 S])lIE 53-2-64, The Si·cuatioll in South Vietnam, TOP SECRET. 
14. 
4 February 1965 SNIE 53-65, Short Term Prospects in S-v.N, TOP SECRET. 
15. 
Memorandum to the President from McGeorge Bundy re The Situation in 
Vietnam,. dated February 7, 1965 (TOP SECRET). 
141 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
16. 
17· 
18. 
19· 
20. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
9 October 1964 SNTE 10-3-64, Probable Communist Reactions ... (TOP 
SE~). . 
. 
18 February 1965 SNTE 10-3/1-65, Communist Reactions to Possible 
U.S. Courses of Action Against North Vietnam, (TOP SECRET). 
2 June 1965, SNIE 10-6-65, Probable Communist Reactions .•. (TOP SECRET, 
SENSITIVE) • 
Saigon 2010, 31 December 1964 (TOP SECRET - NODIS). 
Memorandum for the Secretary, "Notes on the South Vietnamese Situation 
and Alternatives, 6 January 1965 (TOP SECRET). 
McNaughton Papers, "Situation in SVN After Khanh Re-coup," 27 January 
1965 (TOP SECRET). 
22. 
Saigon 2086, 8 January 1965 (TOP SECRET). 
23· 
JCSM-70-65, 29 January 1965 (TOP SECRET). 
24. 
Deputy SecDef Cyrus Vance assured the CJCS, in a Memorandum dated 
4 February 1965, that their views llwill be given the fullest considera-
tion in determining future courses of action." 
25· 
CINCPAC Frag Order Nr. 2 18 Sept. 1964 TOP SECRET. 
CINCPAC Frag Order Nr. 3 28 Oct. 
1964 TOP SECRET. 
26~ Appendix B to JCSM-70-65, 29 Jan 65 
TOP SECRET. 
27· 
JCS 1887 to CINCPAC (J -3 sends) 14 Nov 64 
TOP SECREr. 
28. 
JCS 1~244 to CINCPAC 28 Jan 65 
TOP SECRET LIMDIS. 
29· 
JCS 4484 to CINCPAC 
3 Feb 65 TOP SECRET. 
30. 
JCS 4484 to Cll{CPAC 3 Feb 65 
TOP SECRET. 
31. 
CINCPAC to CllrCPACFLT, CINCPACAF and COMUSNACV 4 Feb 65 
TOP SECREr 
LIMDIS. 
32. 
JCSM 70-65, 29 Jan 65, Appendix B TOP SECRET. 
33· 
CJCS 4612 to CINCPAC 4 Feb 65 
SECRET. 
34. 
Saigon 2762 (?) March 1965 
TOP SECRET EXDIS. 
35. 
IIRefutation of' the New Leaders of the CPSU on 'United Action,'11 
Peking Review ITo. 46, November 12) 1965, pp. 15-16. 
See also the 
Chinese account reported by Peter Grose, The New York Times, Sept. 
12, 1966. 
142 
TOP SECRET - Sensi tiye 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
36. 
CDrCPAC to CINCPACFLT 5 Feb 65 SECRET LDIDIS; J -3!;1 181-65 from 
Director of Ops, Joint Staff to Military Assistant SecDef, dated 
9 Feb 65. 
SECRET 
37. 
Jacob Von Staaveren, U8..CV' Plans and Operations in Southeast Asia, 
1965, p. 7 (TOP SECRET). 
To the constern.-:l.tion of careful U.S. 
target planners, Air Vice Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky who led the VIiIAF 
attack, in a las~-second switch, dumped his flight's bomb loads 
on an unassigned target in the Vinh Linh area, in order, as he 
later explained, to avoid colliding vnth USAF aircraft which, he 
claimed, were striking his originally assigned target when his 
flight arrived over the target area. 
CINCPAC 100100 FebrQarf to 
JCS, TOP SECRET. 
38. 
Robert Shaplen, ~ne Lost Revolution, New York: 
Harper & Row, 
1965, p. 305· 
39. 
See p. 30 below. 
40. 
Department of State Bulletin, Vol LII, No. 1339, Feb 22, 1965, p. 238. 
41. Ibid., p. 239· 
42. 
Ibid., p. 239. 
43. 
Van Staaveren, op.cit., .p. 7. 
44. 
Department of State Bulletin, 1 March 1965, p. 290 and 291. 
45. 
Philip Geyelin, Lyndon B. Johnson and the liorld, pp. 214 and 219· 
46. 
Ne'..rsweek, Feb 22, 1965, p. 19. 
47. 
Economist, Feb. 13, 1965 pp. 637-8. 
48. 
CIA-HI "Free \'Torld Reaction to the Vietnamese Air Strikes" 9 Feb 
1965 CONFIDENTIAL . 
49. 
SNIE 10-3-64, 9 Oct 1964 
TOP SEC&T 
50. 
Foreign Broadca.st Information Division, Special Memorandum, 10 Feb 1965, 
p . 3, CONFIDEIlTIAL. 
51-
Ibid., p. 1-
52. 
Ibid., p. 4. 
53. 
1·leIDorandUlD. to the President from McGeorge Bundy, Re: 
The Situation 
in Vietnam, February 7, 1965 
TOP SECRET 
54. 
Saigon 2445, Februa.ry 9, 1965, TOP S.ECRET EXDIS 
Top SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
55· 
56. 
57. 
58. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Saigon 2445, February 9, 1965 
TOP SECRET EXDIS 
Saigon 2536, Febr-;.w.ry 12, 1965 
TOP SECID.'r EXDIS 
Saigon 2495, February 11, 1965 
TOP SECRET EXDIS 
cnWPAC 170217 Fep to JCS 
TOP SECRET 
59 • . Memorandum to the SecDef JCSM-I00-65, February 11, 1965, TOP SECRET 
SENSITIVE 
60. 
61. 
Van Staaveren, o~.cit., p. 10. 
Memo Maj. Gen. S. J. McKee D/Plans 
DCS/P&'..o to C / S USAF, 7 Har 65, 
" 
' 
subj : 
Use of B.-52 I S in SVlIT" 
(TOP SECRET). 
62. 
Deptel 1718 to Saigon, Feb 13, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS 
64. 
65. 
~~de at the close of an address 
ference Board at vlashingt on, D. 
release) • 
before the Natiop~l Industrial Con-
C., on Feb 17 (White House press 
Department of State Bulletin, If.a.rch 8, 1965, p. 333· 
Saigon 2583, Feb 14, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS 
Deptel 1268 to Ban~£ok Feb 18, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS (also sent to 
Vientiane, Canberra, Wellington, Tokyo, Seoul, Taipei, ~~nila; Info 
CINCPAC, Saigon, London) 
66. 
Saigon 2665, Feb 19, 1965 
TOP SECRET 
67. 
Depte1 Bangkok 1270, Feb 19, 1965 
TOP SECRET 
68. 
Deptel 1744 for Ambassador from Secretary, Feb 17, 1965 
TOP SECRET 
NODIS 
69. 
Memcon "Conversation with Lord Harlech, British Ambassador!!, Feb 
19, 1965 
TOP SECRET 
.' 
70. 
Moscow 2430 to SecState, Feb 19, 1965 
TOP SECRET 
71. 
Deptel 2268 to Noscoyr, Feb 20, 1968 TOP SECRET NODIS 
72. 
Deptel 1783 to Saigon, Feb 20, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS 
73. 
Depel 5327 to London, Feb 2L~J 1965 
TOP SECRE'I' NODIS 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
144 
I 
I I 
74. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The ROLLn~G 'T'HUNDER Program: 
JCS Proposals and Implementation, 
Feb 20-Jun 3, 1965 
TOP SECRET 
75. 
Deptel 4444 to Paris, Feb 25, 1965 
SECRET EXDIS 
76. 
77· 
78. 
79· 
80. 
U. S. Department of State, Aggression from the North: The Record of 
North Vietnam'a Cam~aign to Conquer South Vie~ne.m. U. S. Government 
Printing Office, ?ebr~y 1965. 
Secretary Rusk's News Conference, Feb 25, 1965, Department of State 
Bulletin, ~furch 15, 1965. 
Ibid. 
Address by Secretary Rusk, "Some Fundamentals of .American Policy", 
March 4, 1965, De~ar-tment of State Bulletin, :March 22, 1965. 
Secretary Rusk ' sinter-view of "Face the Nation", March 7, 1965, 
Dep~rtment of State Bulletin, ~~rch 29, 1965. 
81. Moscow 2569 t o SecState, Narch 2, 1965 
SECRET NODIS 
82 •. B-52's on Guam were alerted but not used. 
See Van Staaveren, op.cit., 
p. 13· 
83· 
~lemorandu.m for t he SecDef cl.!-446-65, 23 Febr uary 1965 
SECRET. 
84. 
Memorand1.1J!l for General '\fueeler from Nilitary Assistant toSecDef, 
l~ch 2, 1965 
SECRET. 
85. 
CJCS Memorandum for the SecDef, cH-469-65, 10 r-1arch 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
86. I-Iemorandum from Secretary of t.he Air Force to SecDef, "Report of USAF 
Combat Operations in SEA", ~lay 22, 1965 
SECRET. 
87. 
JCS 6692 (JCS send) to CINCPAC, 91;larch 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
88. 
As noted by McNamara I s hand on I{crJaughton NemorandDJ1 to SeeDef, Subject : 
"Use of Napalm Against NVN Tar gets" , 9 Harch 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
89· 
90. 
91. 
92. 
93. 
Saigon 2889 to SecState, ~/!arch 8, 1965 
SECRET NODIS. 
Saigon 2888 to _SecState, :March 8, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
Deptel 1975 to Saigon, March 12 1965 
TOP SECRET EXDIS . 
, 
Saigon 2949 to SecState, March 13, 1965 
TOP SECFBT EXDIS. 
C O~ ;IDS~14CV Situation Report appended as Tab B to Report of General 
H. K. Johnson, Army Cis to'SecDef et.al. 14 Hareh 1965, Subj ect : 
"Vietnam Trip 5-12 March 1965" 
TOP SECRET. 
TOP SECRZT - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP SECRET - Sensi ti ve 
94. 
DEF 6181 to Saigon Narch 2, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
95· 
CL~CPAC262155 February 1965 to CJCS TOP SECRET. 
050400 l~rch 1965 t o Gen. Westmoreland from Sharp 
See also CINCPAC 
TOP SECRET . 
. 96. 
cis Army Report to SecDef, March 14, 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
97 • 
JCS 7484 to CINC~AC (JCS send) 20 March 1965, 
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE 
EXDIS. 
98. 
Deptel 3000 to Saigon March 16, 1965 
TOP SECRET EXDIS. 
99· 
Q~-438-65 to the SecDef, 19 February 1965 
SECRET. 
100. 
SecDef Memo to CJCS, 27 February 1965 
SECRET. 
101. 
COMUm~CV ~~C J31 7315 March 10, ' 1965 
TOP SECRET 
102. 
Deptel 809 t o Vientiane, ~~rch 20, 1965 
TOP SECRET L~IDIS. 
103· 
CINCPAC 210525 March 1965 to JCS 
TOP SECREl' LIMDIS. 
104. 
Van Staaveren, op.cit., p. 22. 
105· 
JCSloi-221-65, 27 March 1965 TOP SECRET SENSITIVE 
106. · Draft Memorandum, "Plan of Action for South Vietnam" dated l-1arch 24, 
1965 
TOP SECRET. 
10'i' • 
108. 
109· 
110. 
tlRecent E...-x:changes Concerning Attempts to Promote '8. Negotiated Settle-
ment 'of t he Conflict in Vietnam", Series Vietnam No. 3 ~196 5£, ~re­
sented to Parliament by t he Secretary of State for Forelgn AIfalrs 
by Co~nd of Her Majesty, London, August 1965. 
Statement by Secretary Rusk, released March 19, 1965, Department of 
Stat e Bulletin, April 5, 1965, p. 489. 
CINCPAC 310407 March 1965 to JCS 
TOP SECRET. 
National Security Action Memorandum No. 328, April 6, 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
ill. Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, Lyndon B. Johnson: 
The Exercise of -
, Power, New York, 1966, p. 539 . 
112. 
USIA Research and Reference Service "Foreign Reaction to President 
Johnson 's Johns Hopkins Speech," R-44-65, April 14, 1965· 
113· 
Made to news correspondents at the LBJ Ranch on April 17, 1965, 
Department of State Bulletin, }.lay 3, 1965, pp. 650-52. 
146 . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
-
li4. 
115· 
li6. 
li7· 
li8. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
'TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Joint Defense/State cable to Alclbassador Taylor from Asst. Secy. 
McNaughton, dated April 18, 1965 
~OP SECRET. 
Address made before the American Soci ety of International Law at 
Washington, D. C. 
(Depar tment of S~ate Press Release 82). 
In his "Key E1em~nts" Memor a.ndum (see Sections IX A and D). 
See Evans and Novack, op.cit., p. 547. 
Remarks by Pres~Qent Johnson at the White House to a group of 
Senators and COrloo-ressmen on May 4, 1965. 
Department of State 
Bulletin, May 24, 1965, p. 819-20 . 
. li9· Saigon 3632 to SecState, Hay 4, 1965 
SECRET LTIIDIS. 
120. 
Memo TS #185843-c, revised April 22, 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
121. 
JCSM-275-65 to SecDef, 14 April 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
122. 
~M-600-65 to SecDef, 6 ~~y 1965 
TOP SECRET; the Joint Chiefs. con-
tin1:.ed to urge throughout May and June that attacks be authorlzed 
against the SA-2 sites near Hanoi as well as against IL-28 's and 
:MIG's at Ph'J.c Yen. 
Bu.t since the SAt"i' s had not then interfered 
with US ope:::-ati.ons , and since Ambassador Johnson, wit h General 
Westmorel and's concurrence, recommended against striking the IL-28's, 
Secr etar:y McNamara disapproved (Memo for CJCS from SecDef., 15 June 
1965 
TOP SECRET) . 
123-
Depte1 2553 to Saigon, May 10, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
124. 
Saigon 3731 + 0 S St t 
6 
y 
ec 
a e) May 11, 19 5 
TOP SEC~~ NODIS. 
125-
Depte1 2557 to Saigon, May 11, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
126. 
DEF001900 SEC DEF SENDS, 11 May 1965, TOP SECRET LTIIDIS. 
127· 
Depte1 2565 to Saigon, May 12, 1965 TOP SECRET NODIS. 
128. 
129· 
Depte1 3101 t o Moscow (Info. to Saigon) V.!8.y 11, 1965 
TOP SECRET 
NODIS (STRICTLY E'IES ONLY FOR Al-mASSAIDRS FRON SECRETARY). 
~pte1 3;04 to Moscow, May il, 1965 (Inf o Saigon) 
TOP SECRET 
NODIS (S.LRI CTLY EYES ONLY FOR AHBASSAOORS FRON SECRETA.1W). 
Hade before the ASSOCiation of American Editorial Cart oonist~ at , 
the WJlite Eouse on May 13 (Hhite House press release; as-de1lverec 
tan ). 
. 
131. Moscow 3378 to SecState, May 12, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
147 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
132. 
Deptel 3105 to Moscow (also transmitted London for Secretary's eyes 
only) }iIay 12) 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
133· Moscow 3393 to SecState May 13, 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
134. Moscow 3391 to SecState (Info London, fOl' Secretary's eyes only) 
May 12, 1965 
TO? SECRET NODIS. 
135· Moscow 3394 to SecState (Inf o London for Secretary's eyes only) May 
13, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
136. Moscow 3425 to SecState (Info' Vienna for Secretary's eyes only) May 
14, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
137· 
Saigon 4084 to SecState, June 6, 1965 
TOP SECRET EXDIS. 
138. 
Sai gon 3781 to SecState, May 16, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
139· Moscow 3395 to SecState (Info to London _ eyes only for Secretary) 
~~y 13, 1965 
SECRET NODIS. 
140. Moscow 3416 to SecState, May 14, 1965 
SECRET NODIS. 
141. Vienna 29 to SecState (For Under secretary from the Secretary ) r.~y 
15, 1965 
SECRET NODIS . 
142. 
Depte1 7323 to London (1211 to Ottawa) from Secretary to Ambassadors 
May 17, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
143. Moscow 3444 to SecStat.e, May 17, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
Depte1 
3171 to Noscow, Kay 17, 1965 
TOP SECRET NODIS. 
144. 
Depte1 2425 to New DeL'1i (From Secretary to Ambassadors) May 18, 
1965 
SEC~'T NODIS. 
145. 
Saigon 4083 to SecState, June 6, 1965 
CO~ITIDENTIAL LIMDIS. 
146. 
Depte1 3696 to Bonn) June 9, 1965 . TOP SECRET EXDIS. 
147. 
JCS 002230 to CINCPAC (JCS send), 17120lZ Hay 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
148. Memorandum to the Secretary from v-T. W. Rostow, 'May 20, 1965 
SECRET. 
149. Memorandum to the Secretary from itT. W. Rostow, "An Electric Power 
Cut-throug1: .. in North Vietnam", April 1, 1965 
SECRET. 
150. 
COMUSH.A.CV 16006 (i':rom HAC J-312) to CINCPAC, May 14, 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
148 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
151. 
JCS 002249 (JCS send) to CINCPAC, CINCSAC, COMU~~CV, 17 May 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
152. Memoranda for the SeeDef CM-534-65, 6 April 1965; JCSM 498-65, 
2 July 1965 
TOP SECRET. 
153. 
Memorandum for the JCS, CSAF M-105-65, 30 June 1965 
TOP SECRET . 
. 
TOP SECRE'f - Sensitive 
