Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to the United Nations the admitting of North and South Vietnam as
separate states, it signalled that the USSR might be prepared in the
interests of "peaceful coexistence," to make a great power deal which
would have lent permanency to the partition of Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh,
in evident surprise, violently dissented. When in February 1957
Khrushchev went further in affirming his intention to "coexist" with the
United States, the DRV quickly moved to realign its own and Soviet
policies. In May 1957, the Soviet head of state, Voroshilov, visited
Hanoi, and in July and August 1957, Ho Chi Minh traveled extensively
in Eastern Europe, spending several days in Moscow. The Voroshilov
visit was given top billing by the Hanoi Press and Ho, upon his return
from Moscow, indicated that important decisions had been reached.
Thereafter, Hanoi and Moscow marched more in step.

In the meantime, the needs and desires of communist rebels in
South Vietnam had been communicated directly to Hanoi in the person of
Le Duan, who is known to have been in South Vietnam in 1955 and 1956,
and to have returned to Hanoi sometime before the fall of 1957. In
September of that year, upon Ho's return from Burope, Le Duan surfaced
as one of the members of the Lao Dong Politburo; it is possible that he
was already at that time de facto the First Secretary of the Lao Dong
Party, to which position he was formally promoted in September 1960.

In 1955 and 1956, Le Duan, from the testimony of prisoners and captured
documents, had been expressing conviction that Diem would stamp out the
communist movement in South Vietnam unless the DRV were to reinforce
the party there. Presumably, he carried these views into the inner
councils of the DRV. In November 1957, Le Duan and Ho traveled to
Moscow to attend the Conference of Communist and Workers’ Parties of
Socialist Countries. The Declaration of that conference, quoted

above, has since been cited repeatedly by both North and South Viet-
namese communists, as one of the strategic turning points in their
modern history. Le Duan, upon his return to Hanoi from Moscow, issued
a statement to the effect that the DRV's way was now clear. Taking

le Duan literally, it could be construed that the DRV deemed the Moscow
Declaration of 1957 the "go ahead" signal from Moscow and Peking for
forceful pursuit of its objectives.

There is some sparse evidence that the DRV actually did begin moving
in 1958 to set up a mechanism for supporting the insurgency in South
Vietnam. But even had the decision been taken, as suggested above, in
late 1957, it is unlikely that there would have been much manifestation
of it in 1958. The Lao Dong leadership had for years stressed the lessons
that they had learned fram experience on the essentiality of carefully
preparing a party infrastructure and building guerrilla bases before
proceeding with an insurgency. Viet Minh doctrine would have dictated
priority concern to refurbishing the communist party apparatus in
South Vietnam, and it is possible that such a process was set in
motion during 1958. Orders were captured from Hanoi which directed
guerrilla bases be prepared in South Vietnam in early 1959.

28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
