Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In late February, as the debate over roles and missions (AB 142),
progress in pacification, ARVN effectiveness; PRACTICE NINE Require-
ments, enemy intentions and infiltration reached a crescendo, it became
clear that the deployment debate was centered upon one major uncertainty --
How many more U.S. troops would it require to achieve U.S. objectives in
SVN, and more basically in the face of the infiltration trends past and
present could our massive infusions of U.S. forces turn the trick.

Operation CEDAR FALLS, deep into the Iron Triangle, redoubt had
produced a windfall of enemy documents and plans, many of which bore
directly upon enemy strategy and indirectly conditioned our expectations
and confidence in our calculations. Some of them revealed a "new strategy
developed after the entry of substantial US and Free World forces into
South Vietnam." 54/ COMUSMACV, recounting the information obtained in
the document, had stated that for the enemy:

",..The main emphasis is on continued reinforcement
from North Vietnam to defeat US and RVN forces in South
Vietnam. This strategy reaffirms the concept of the necessity
for @ protracted war, but nonetheless stresses the need both
to seize and to create opportunities for decisive tactical
victories of high impact effect in @ relatively short time.
At the same time it stresses intensified guerrille action and
public disturbances, all featuring the customary coordination
between military and political action. It appears that the
principal objective area is the highlands, the secondary areas
being Quang Tri and Thua Thien and the coastal provinces of
the Ii Corps. It is understood, of course, that the Saigon
area is the ultimate objective.

"Analysis of the broad strategic guidance contained in
the early 1966 document just mentioned, along with later
prisoner interrogations suggests the conceptual framework
of enemy planning. This would include attacks in the I Corps
and II Corps coastal areas to cause our forces to be redeployed.
If the enemy could then succeed in weakening our forcas in the
highlands by luring part of them into the coastal areas and
then pinning them down, conditions might be achieved which he
would consider favorable for a spectacular victory in the
highlands employing main forces already located there and
possibly reinforced by continued infiltration from North Viet-
nam. Such an attempt probably would not be with the intent
to hold ground permanently, but rather to create a psychologi-
cal shock designed to affect US public opinion against continu-
ation of the war, to bolster his own morale, and to improve his
position for negotiation or further combat. To achieve this,
his favored objective, as shown by documentary evidence, would
be the entrapment and "annihilation" of a lerge US unit,

M6 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
