Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ho Chi Minh forwarded to the Secretary of State the D.R.V. Declaration
of Independence, Bao Dai's abdication rescript, general DRV foreign
policy declarations, and its expressed position on the war in South
Vietnam. He cited the Atlantic Charter as the “foundation of future
Vietnam" and the San Francisco Charter as eradicating colonial oppres-
sion. Ho appealed for "immediate interference" and submitted several
requests -- the key one being that the United Nations should recognize
the full independence of Vietnam. Again, in November, he made three
points: (1) the French had ignored all treaties at the end of the war
and attacked Saigon in September; (2) the Vietnamese people were willing
to support the United Nations, but would fight any French troops coming
into Vietnamese territory; and (3) any bloodshed would be the responsi-
bility of the French. Two weeks later, Ho appealed to President Truman
and UNRRA for assistance to combat starvation caused by flood, drought,
and French conflict. Also in November, Ho wrote to the Secretary of
State asking to establish cultural relations with the U.S. by sending
fifty Vietnamese students to the U.S., and to complain of the absence
of Vietnamese representation at the Washington Conference for the Far
East. Prompted by Truman's appointment of General Marshall as special
representative in China, early in 1946 Ho Chi Minh again appealed for
direct intervention by the U.S. to provide an immediate solution of the
Vietnamese issue. On 16 February 1946, a tone of irritation was intro-
duced: Ho wrote once more to President Truman implying "complicity,

or at least, the connivance of the Great Democracies" in the French
aggression; but still Ho pleaded with the U.S. to take a "decisive step”
in support of Vietnamese independence asking only what had been "graci-
ously granted to the Philippines." Ho then addressed an urgent broad-
cast appeal to the U.S., China, Russia, and Great Britain for “interference
by the Big Four to stop the bloodshed and to bring the Indochina issue
before the United Nations.

4

It became abundantly clear, however, that the U.S. would do nothing
to aid the Viet Minh. Assuming the sincerity of Ho Chi Minh's appeals,
the most opportune time for the U.S. to have intervened in Vietnam
passed in autwm, 1945, and prospects for U.S. action dimmed as DRV
negotiations with the French proceeded in February-March 1946. Paradox-
ically, it was the possibility of communist accession to power in France
that both added to Ho's incentive to negotiate with the French, and
stimulated stronger U.S. support for France. Ultimately, the U.S. was
deterred from backing Viet Minh anti-colonialism (though the U.S. pres-
sured France for concessions to Viet nationalism) because its interests
seemed more directly engaged in shoring up the-French as a key part of
its assistance to European recovery. On the other hand, Ho Chi Minh
continued to hope for a new France, breaking away from its old coloni-
alist policies under a Socialist or Communist government.

Ho Chi Minh's correspondence with the U.S. ceased after the 6 March
1946 Accord with France, although Ho Chi Minh did visit the U.S. Embassy
in Paris on 11 September 1946,

aie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
