Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

should be able to speak for and to its people who will need
special guidance and leadership throughout the coming criti-
cal period. ‘The Government should be capable of maintaining
law and order in the principal centers of population, assuring
their effective execution by military: and police forces com-
pletely responsive to its authority. The Government must

have at its disposal means to cope promptly and effectively
with enemy reactions which must be expected to result from
any change in the pattern of our operations.

"To bring about this condition will require a demonstra-
tion of far greater national unity against the Communist enemy
at this critical time than exists at present. It is a matter
of greatest difficulty for the United States Government to
require great sacrifices by American citizens on behalf of
South Vietnam when reports from Saigon repeatedly give evi-
dence of heedless. self-interest and shortsightedness among
so many major political groups.

As a quid pro quo, it said:

",..While the Government of Vietnam is making progress
toward achieving the goals set forth above, the United States
Government would be willing to strike harder at infiltration
routes in Laos and at sea. With respect to Laos, the United
States Government is prepared, in conjunction with the Royal
Iaos Government, to add United States eir power as needed to
restrict the use of Laotian territory as a route of infiltra-
tion into South Vietnam. With respect to the sea, the United
States Government would favor an intensification of those
covert maritime operations which have proved their useful-
ness in harassing the enemy. The United States would regard
the combination of these operations in Laos and at sea as
constituting Phase I of a measured increase of military pres-
sures directed toward reducing infiltration and warning the
Government of North Vietnam of the risks it is running.

",.If the Government of Vietnam is able to demonstrate
its effectiveness and capability of achieving the minimum
conditions set forth above, the United States Government is

_ prepared to consider a program of direct military pressure
on North Vietnam as Phase ITI...

"As contemplated by the United States Government, Phase II
would, in general terms, constitute a series of air attacks
on North Vietnam progressively mounting in scope and intensity
for the purpose of convincing the leaders of North Vietnam
that it is to their interest to cease aid to the Viet Cong
and respect the independence and security of South Vietnam..." 5h/

In short, the USG offered to add some of its aircraft immediately to the
Vietnamese ones already bombing the Laotian corridor, in exchange for a

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
