Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

attitudes, etc. But I won't argue the case here--time
will tell who's right. In any case, we're not drawing
ahead clearly enough or fast enough to optimize our

confidence in achieving a 12-18 month turnaround." 48/

Finally, he questioned the rationale for the major force increases
COMUSMACV had asked:

"How Much Would We Achieve from a Major New US Force a
Commitment? COMUSMACV is asking for 210,000 men no later than
June 1968 and roughly 100,000 as soon as possible (on top of
the 470,000 plus 60,000 ROK's, etc. already programmed). How-
ever, MACV's justification for these added forces needs further
review. To what extent are they based on inflated 0/B estimates
of enemy strength? If enemy main force strength is now levelling
off because of high kill ratios, etc., would the added US forces
be used for pacification? General De Puy estimates that 50%
of US/ROK maneuver battalions are already supporting RD by
dealing with the "middle war", the VC main force provincial
battalions. How good are US forces at pacification-related
tasks, as compared to RVNAF? What are the trade-offs? A major
US force commitment to pacification also basically changes the
nature of our presence in Vietnam and might force us to stay
indefinitely in strength. Whether or not the added US forces
would become heavily involved in pacification, however, another
major US force increase raises so many other issues that we
must carefully examine whether this trip is necessary." ho/

To this Komer added a package of alternative measures designed to get the
GVN moving -- militarily, politically, economically ~-- all of which he felt
might reduce or obviate the need for a major U.S. force increase. This
program included:

"1. First is an all-out effort to get more for our
money out of RVNAF. We have trained and equipped over 650,000
(and for so little cost that it is a good investment in any case).
But can't we greatly increase the return?

(a) Insist on jacking up RVNAP leadership at all
levels. All observers agree that this is RVNAF's most critical
weakness. A massive attack on it could pay real short-run
dividends. Insist on dismissal of incompetent commanders.

Find US means for rewarding competent ones, such as withholding
MAP from ineffective units.

(b) Insist on a Joint Command. Putting at least
ARVN under Westy and his corps commanders might be the best
short-run way to get more response out of ARVN. If it would
ease the GVN problem, the contingents of the other five con-
tributors could be added. Whatever the problems entailed,
they seem small to me compared to sending another 200,000 men.

80 TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive
