Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

DOI TOP SECRET - Sensitive

conclusion. The bombing campaign is one of the two trump
cards in the hands of the President (the other being the
presence of US troops in SVN). It should not be given up
without an end to the NVN aggression in SVN. 61/

The Chiefs did more than just dissent from a McNamara
recommendation, however. They closed their memo with a lengthy counter-
proposal with significant political overtones clearly intended for the
President's eyes. In their own words this is what they said:

The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the war has
reached a stage at which decisions taken over the next
sixty days can determine the outcome of the war and, con-
sequently, can affect the over-all security interests of
the United States for years to come. Therefore, they wish
to provide to you and to the President their unequivocal
views on two salient aspects of the war situation: the
search for peace and military pressures on NVN.

a. The frequent, broadly-based public offers
made by the President to settle the war by peaceful means
on a generous basis, which would take from NVN nothing it
now has, have been admirable. Certainly, no one - American
or foreigner - except those who are determined not to be
convinced, can doubt the sincerity, the generosity, the
altruism of.US actions and objectives. In the opinion of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff the time has come when further
overt actions and offers on our part are not only non-
productive, they are counterproductive. A logical case
[sic] can be made that the American people, our Allies,
and our enemies alike are increasingly uncertain as to
our resolution to pursue the war to a successful conclusion.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff advocate the following:

(1) A statement by the President during the
Manila Conference of his unswerving determination to carry
on the war until NVN aggression against SVN shall cease;

(2) Continued covert exploration of all avenues
leading to a peaceful settlement of the war; and

(3) Continued alertness to detect and react
appropriately to withdrawal of North Vietnamese troops from
SVN and cessation of support to the VC.

b. In JCSM-955-64, dated 14 November 1964, and in
ICSM-962-64, dated 23 November 1964, the Joint Chiefs of Staff

provided their views as to the military pressures which should be

167 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
