Le

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"For no matter how much intellectual luggage we carry around
in our heads, it becomes valuable only if we know how to use the
information-~only if we are able to relate one fact of a problem to
the others do we truly understand them.

“This is my subject today--the need for greater individual
and collective understending of some of the international facts of
today's life. We need to understand our country's purpose and role
in strengthening the world’s free nations which, with us, see our
eoncepts of freedom and humen dignity threatened by atheistic dicta-
torship.

"Tf through education--no matter how acquired--people develop
understanding of basic issues, and so can distinguish between the
common, long-term good of all, on the one hand, and convenient but
shortsighted expediency on the other, they will support policies
“under which the nation will prosper. And if people should ever lack
the discernment to understand, or the character to rise above their
own selfish short-term interests, free government would become well
nigh impossible to sustain. Such a government would be reduced to
nothing more than a device which seeks merely to accommodate itself
and the country's good to the bitter tugs-of-war of conflicting pres-
sure groups. Disaster could eventually result.

"Though the subject I have assigned myself is neither abstruse
nor particularly difficult to comprehend, its importance to our
national and individual lives is such that failure to mershal, to
organize, and to analyze the facts perteining to it could have for
all of us consequences of the most serious character. We must study,
think, and decide on the governmental program that we term ‘Mutual
Security. '

“The true need and value of this program will be recognized by
our people only if they can answer this question: ‘Why should America,
at heavy and immediate sacrifice to herself, assist many other nations,
particularly the less developed ones, in achieving greater moral, eco-
nomic, and military strength?’

"What are the facts?

“The first and most important fact is the implacable end fre-
quently expressed purpose of imperialistic communism to promote world
revolution, destroy freedom, and communize the world.

"Tis methods are all-inclusive, ranging through the use of propa-

ganda, political subversion, economic penetration, and the use or the
threat of peeks

B-47
