ae!

t NEG Saye...

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

to express to friendly governments its own views concerning
the dangers of hasty recognition of the Chinese Communist
regime but should not take a, stand which would engage the
prestige of the United States in an attenpt to prevent such
recognition. In general, however, it should be realized
that it would be inappropriate for the United States to
adopt ea posture more hostile or policies more harsh towards
a Communist China than towards the USSR itself. It should
also be realized thet the according of recognition by other
friendly countries would affect the bargaining position of
the United States in the absence of United States recogni-
tion and would affect United States private and nationel
interests in Chine. In the event thet recognition of the
Chinese Communists is anticipated, appropriate steps should
be taken to make it clear that recognition should not be
construed as approval of the Chinese Communist regime, or
abatement of our hostility to Soviet efforts to exercise
control in China.

(2) The United States should continue the policies of
avoiding military and political support of any non-Comnunist
elements in China unless such elements are willing actively
to resist Communism with or without United States eid and
unless such support would mean reasonable resistance to the
Communists and contribute to the over-all national interests
of the United States.* In determining whether or in what
manner any such assistance or encouragement should be given,
consideration would have to be given to the protection which
Chinese Communist authorities, as they become generally rec-
ognized by other governments, would be eble to claim under
4nternationel law end the Charter of the United Nations.

The United States should maintain so far as feasible active
contact with all elements in China and maintein our cultural
and informational program et the most active feasible level.

(3) The United States should exploit, through appropri-
ate politicel, psychological and economic means, any rifts
between the Chinese Communists and the USSR end between the
Stelinists end other elements in China, while scrupulously
avoiding the appearance of intervention. Where appropriate,
covert as well es overt means should be utilized to achieve
these objectives.*

(4) The United States should, as a security measure,
seek to prevent the USSR, its European satellites, and North
Korea from obtaining from ebroad through China supvlies of
stretegic materials and equipment which are currently denied
them by the United States and its European allies through

2/10

TOP SECRET

1) eee Mt 6

ee
