Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. B.

THE CHARACTER AND POWER OF THE VIET MINH
SUMMARY

One of the recurrent themes of criticism of U.S. policy in Vietnam
has been that from the end of World War II on, there was a failure to
recognize that the Viet Minh was the principal vehicle for Vietnamese
nationalism and that it, in fact, was in control of and effectively
governing all of Vietnam. Evidence on issues like popularity and con-
trol is always somewhat suspect--especially when dealing with an exotic
country like Vietnam at a time when what Americans knew about it was
largely dependent on French sources. Nonetheless, some generalizations
can be made and supported.

First, the Viet Minh was the main repository of Vietnamese nationalism
and anti-French colonialism. There were other such groups promoting Viet
independence but none were competitive on a country-wide scale. It is
also true that the disciplined, well-organized, and well-led Indochinese
Communist Party was the controlling element in the Viet Minh. The Icp
was not, however, in the numerical majority either in total membership
or in leadership posts held. This gap between control and numbers can
be explained by two factors: (a) ICP strategy was to wify nationalist
elements to achieve the immediate objective of independence; and (b) the
other components of the Viet Minh were sizable enough to fractionalize
the whole movement. In other words, from World War II on, the ICP was
strong enough to lead, but not to dominate Vietnamese nationalism.

Second, the Viet Minh was sufficiently popular and effective to
turn itself into a Vietnam-wide government that could have extended its
authority throughout the country after World War II--except for the
obstacle of reasserted French power, and, to a lesser degree, of indi-
genous political opposition in Cochinchina. The Viet Minh was always
more powerful in Tonkin and Annam than in South Vietnam. However, it
seems likely that in the absence of the French, the Viet Minh through
its governmental creation, the DRV, would have overridden indigenous
tribal, religious, and other opposition in short order.

Vietnamese nationalism developed three types of political parties
or movements:

Reform parties. Narrowly based among the small educated Viet-

namese elite, these parties made little pretense at representing the
masses of the peasantry--except in the ancient mandarinal sense of

B-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
