Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

to conquer all free nations within their reach. Our own welfare and
our own freedom would be in danger. :

"This is the clearest lesson of our time. From Munich until today
we have learned that to yield to aggression brings only greater threats--
and more destructive war. To stand firm is the only guarantee of lasting
peace."

x % A eo

&

"Viet Cong Weapons From External Sources

"The latest step has been the covert infiltration of a regular
combat unit of the North Vietnamese Army into South Viet-Nam. Evidence
accumulated within the last month now confirms the presence in northwest
Kontum Province--that is in the central highland area of South Viet-Nam,
around Pleiku and north of Pleiku--recent evidence which we have received
confirms the presence in that northwest Kontum Province of the 2d Rattalion
of the 325th Division of the regular North Vietnamese Army. It is impor-
tant to recognize, I think, that the great bulk of the weapons which the
Viet Cong are using and with which they are supplied come from external
sources."

[Secretary McNamara/

LL

Communist Strategy

"Q. Mr. Secretary, a personal question. As the fighting has
increased in Viet-lNam, more and more of the U.S. critics of the admin-
istration's policy have been referring to this as ‘McNamara's war.'
What is your reaction? Does this annoy you?

"A. It does not annoy me because I think it is a war that is being
fought to preserve the freedom of a very brave people, an independent
nation. It is a war which is being fought to counter the strategy of the
Communists, a strategy which Premier Khrushchev laid out very clearly in
the very famous speech which he made on January 6, 1961.

"You may recall that at that time he divided all wars into three
categories. He spoke of world wars, meaning nuclear wars; he spoke of
local wars, by which he meant large-scale conventional wars; and then he
spoke of what he called ‘wars of liberation.'

"He ruled out world wars as being too dangerous to the existence of
the Communist states. He ruled out local wars because he said they could
very easily escalate into nuclear wars which would lead to the ultimate
destruction of the Communist states. But he strongly endorsed 'wars of

D-40
