Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SZ. TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would prejudice relations with Diem, they would not necessarily harm
relations with others of influence in the country, in particular his
generals,

Finally, although Kennedy's decisions here were contrary to the
implications of the summary paper in the Taylor Report, they were not
particularly inconsistent with the appendices by the State representa-
tives. For these, as noted, took a far less rosy view of Diem's
prospects than appeared in the summary.

On the second issue -- the U.S. combat military task force -- the
available record tells us only the positions of Taylor and of the
Defense Department. We are not sure what the position of State was --
although Sorenson claims that all the President's senior advisors had
recommended going ahead with sending some ground troops. 7/

Even Taylor's position is slightly ambiguous. It is conceivable
that he argued for the Task Force mainly because he thought that the
numbers of U.S. personnel that might be sent as advisors, pilots, and
other specialists would not add up to a large enough increment to have
much of a psychological impact on South Vietnamese morale. But his
choice of language indicates that a mere question of numbers was not
the real issue. Rather Taylor's argument seems to have been that
specifically ground forces (not necessarily all or even mainly infantry-
men, but ground soldiers who would be out in the eountryside where they
could be shot at and shoot back) were what was needed. Combat engineers
to work in th. VC-infested flood area in the Delta would meet that need.
Helicopter pilots and mechanics and advisors, who might accompany Viet-
namese operations, but could not undertake ground operations on their
own apparently would not. There is only one easily imagined reason for
seeing this as a crucial distinction. And that would be if a critical
object of the stepped up American program Was to be exactly what Taylor
said it should be in his final cable from Saigon: " ,,assuring Diem
of our readiness to join him in a military showdown with the Viet Cong

Thus the flood task force was essentially different from the bal-
ance of the military program, It did not fill an urgent need for military
specialists or expertise not adequately available within Vietnam; it was
an implicit commitment to deny the Viet Cong 4 victory even if major
American ground forces should be required.

Taylor clearly did not see the need for large U.S. ground involve-
ment as at all probable. ("The risks of backing into a major Asian war
by way of SVN are present but are not impressive,” in large part because
"NVN is extremely vulnerable to conventional bombing.") At another
point, Taylor warns the President, “If the first contingent is not
enough, ... it will be difficult to resist the pressure to reinforce.

If the ultimate result sought is the closing of the frontiers and the

ct TOP SECRET - Sensitive
