ba

=)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitiv

The first effect, that of forcing the enemy into a
system of night movement, occurs at a lower frequency of
armed reconnaissance sorties than the level of the past
several months. The enemy was already moving at night
in 1965, before the sortie rate had reached half the
current level; further sorties have no further effect on
the enemy's overall operating system. The second effect,
that of forcing the enemy to deploy repair crews, equip-
ment, and porters, is also largely brought about by a
comparatively low interdiction effort. Our interdiction
campaign in 1965 and early this year forced NVN to assign
roughly 300,000 additional personnel to LOCs; there is no
indication that recent sortie increases have caused further
increases in the number of these personnel. Once the
enemy system can repair road cuts and damaged bridges in
a few hours, as it has demonstrated it can, additional
sorties may work this system harder but are unlikely to
cause a significant increase in its costs. Only the third
effect, the destruction of vehicles and their cargoes, con-
tinues to increase in about the same proportion as the number
of armed reconnaissance sorties, but without noticeable
impact on VC/NVA operations. The overall capability of
the NVN transport system to move supplies within NVN
apparently improved in September in spite of 12,200 attack
sorties.

In a summary paragraph, the draft memo made the entire case against the
bombing:

The increased damage to targets is not producing notice-
able results. No serious shortage of POL in North Vietnam
is evident, and stocks on hand, with recent imports, have
been adequate to sustain necessary operations. Wo serious
transport problem in the movement of supplies to or within
North Vietnam is evident; most transportation routes appear
to be open, and there has recently been a major logistical
build-up in the area of the DMZ. The raids have disrupted
the civil populace and caused isolated food shortages, but
have not significantly weakened popular morale. Air strikes
continue to depress economic growth and have been responsible
for abandonment of some plans for economic development, but
essential economic activities continue. The increasing
amounts of physical damage sustained by North Vietnamese are
in large measure compensated by aid received from other
Communist countries. Thus, in spite of an interdiction
campaign costing at least $250 million per month at current
levels, no significant impact on the war in South Vietnam
is evident. The monetary value of damage to NVN since the

1S TOP SECRET - Sensitive
