Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

= he
fion ot bin principles ct the atlantic ond San #raneisco

Charters, [ie blames tie wrench Tor the present disturb-

ances in Indochina ana asks Lor *dimedlate intorwerenee
by the United ations lest the situation result in the
spread of courlict throughout the var 2H8%. be makes

four requests: (1) The situation should be discussed at
the first meeting of the ar sastern Advisory Commission;
‘(&) Annomite delezates should be allowed to present the
views of the "Vietnamese Government"; (3) an investication
committee should be sent to Indochina; nnd (4) the United —
Nations should recognize Annanite independence.

The Chinese Overseas Affairs official states thot to
Chi Minh and Pao Tai desire to proceed secretly to Chung-
King to talk with the Gcneralissiuo and asks that a plarme
be sent to Indochina for that purpose. Jn the letter from
the annamite leaders to the Generalissino, they express
their desire to proceed to Vhunsking to pay their respecus
to him and ask for a reply. ind of SUNMALY

The United States Army officers deseribe conditions in
Indocnina as rollows;:

The situation is complicated by the food problem, age~
eravated by the failure of the Chinese Oceunation Forces
to brinz food supplies with thon. There are estimated to
be approximately 100,000 Chinese troops in Indochina at
present find tuey have taken over large rice stocks in the
naiphong area which obiuerwise might have been used to
relieve the suffering. The french have expressed their
Willingness to transport rice from Saigon, which tiey wish
to give to dealers in tie Hanoi and taiphong areas for sale,
as the most effective metiod of distribution. Ho Chi finh
is willing to permit the transport of such rice and has
azreed to sec to its distribution as a gift of the rench
people but not aS o gift from the ifreneh Government, Floods
have caused a fifty percent loss in crops in the north while
in Saigon there are large exces; stocks of rice. The
Chinese are now endeavoring to arrance for the transport ofF
rice overland from Saigon but that wiil, of course, be a
slow process, given the present condition of conmunications
facilities.

Tne Annamites have been fcuilty of excesses, having
killed 20 to 30 ¢rench womenanda children held as hosta,3es
at Saigon and.navins taken many other French hostuses in
the Hanoi-[laiphony; and Vinh-Hue areas, In ifanoi annamite
armed squads are continually searching French homes Tor
hidden wenpons and the sicht of #renechmen stending against
the wall outside tieir homes under guard by arned Annamites
while,others search the house is a frejuent one.

Americans ere extrenely populer with the 4nnamites, ,
who do everything vossible to convince tiem of tue justice
of their cause. ‘There are still evidences of pro-Vichy
sentiment in the Hanoi area and those french who have not
been held prisoner in the citadel are apt to be suspect
to te those who played a part in the resistance movement.

=a

C-17 - The
