Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(4) June: Concentrate the bombing of North Vietnam on
physical interdiction of men and materiel. This would mean
terminating, except where the interdiction objective clearly
dictates otherwise, all bombing north of 20° and improving
interdiction as much as possible in the infiltration "funnel"
south of 20° by concentration of sorties and by an all-out
effort to improve detection devices, denial weapons, and inter-
diction tactics.

(5) July: Avoid the explosive Congressional debate and
US Reserve call-up implicit in the Westmoreland troop request.
Decide that, unless the military situation worsens dramatically,
US deployments will be limited to Program 4}-plus (which, according
to General Westmoreland, will not put us in danger of being
defeated, but will mean slow progress in the South). Associ-
ated with this decision are decisions not to use large numbers
of US troops in the Delta and not to use large numbers of them
in grass-roots pacification work.

(6) September: Move the newly elected Saigon government
well beyond its National Reconciliation program to seek 4
political settlement with the non-Communist members of the
NLF--- to explore a ceasefire and to reach an accommodation
with the non-Communist South Vietnamese who are under the VC
banner; to accept them as members of an opposition political
party, and, if necessary, to accept their individual participa-
tion in the national government -~- in sum, a settlement to
transform the members of the VC from military opponents to
political opponents.

(7) October: Explain the situation to the Canadians,
Indians, British, UN and others, as well as nations now con-
tributing forces, requesting them to contribute border forces
to help make the inside-South Vietnam accommodation possible,
and -- consistent with our desire neither to occupy nor to have
bases in Vietnam -- offering to remove later an equivalent number
of U.S. forces. (This initiative is worth taking despite its
slim chance of success.) 111/

Having made the case for de-escalation and compromise, the
DPM ended on a note of candor with a clear ssatement of its disadvantages

and problems:

The difficulties with this approach are neither few nor
small: There will be those who disagree with the circum-
scription of the US commitment (indeed, at one time or another,
one US voice or another has told the Vietnamese, third coun-
tries, the US Congress, and the public of “soals" or "objectives"

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
