Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

virtually alone. Unaided by Bao Dai, opposed by the French, and
proferred by Americans mainly advice, criticism, and promises -- but
scant material assistance -- Ngo Dinh Diem in ten months surmounted

the partition of his nation by the Geneva powers, two threatened military
coups by his Army Chiefs of Staff, frenetic clashes with the Binh Xuyen
armed sects, the withdrawal of the Viet Minh, and the influx of 900,000
refugees from North Vietnam.

2. Early U.S.-Diem Relations

Diem's durability was one of those surprises in Vietnam
which prompted Americans thereafter to refer to the "miracle in Vietnam."
On 7 December 1954, Senator Mansfield judged that U.S. "prospects for
helping Diem strengthen and uphold South Vietnam look very dim." 20/

U.S. Ambassador Heath reported from Saigon on 17 December 1954 a dim view
of Diem's chances since "there is every evidence that the French do not
want Diem to succeed." 21/ In a January, 1955, report to the National
Security Council, General J. Lawton Collins agreed with both analyses. 22
On 7 April 1955, Collins cabled from Saigon that: "...it is my considered
judgment that the man lacks the personal qualities of leadership and the
executive ability successfully to head-a government that must compete

with the unity of purpose and efficiency of the Viet Minh under Ho Chi
Minh." 23/ On 19 April, Collins again cabled: "I see no alternative to
the early replacement of Dien." 2h/

On 26 April 1955, U.S. Netional Intelligence Estimate
63.1-2-55, "Possible Developments in South Vietnam," took the view that:
; paper

"A political impasse exists in Saigon where the legally
constituted government of Premier Diem is being challenged by
a venal special interest group, the Binh Xuyen, which controls
the National Security Police, and is temporarily allied with
some elements of the religious sects....

"Even if the present impasse were resolved, we believe that
it would be extremely difficult, at best, for a Vietnamese
government, regardless of its composition, to make progress
toward developing a strong, stable anti-Communist government
capable of resolving the basic social, economic, and political
problems of Vietnam, the special problems arising from the
Geneva agreement, and capable of meeting the long-range challenge
of the Communists...."

But opinion in Washington swung sharply when, in late April, Diem
managed to survive a severe test of arms with his army and the sects.
Senators Mansfield and Knowland issued strong statements of support
for him, and on May 2 Senator Hubert Humphrey told the Senate that:

11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
