Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

although Laos was only one of the things that influenced the April 26
effort, while it became the overwhelming element in the May 6 effort.
It is worth setting out these influencing factors, specifically:

1. The security situation in Vietnam.
2. The Administration's special interest in counter-insurgency.

3. The apparent futility and divisiveness of the Durbrow (pres-
sure) tactics for dealing with Diem.

4, Eventually most important, and substantially narrowing the
range of options realistically open to the Administration,
the weakness of US policy in Laos, and the consequent
strongly felt need for a signal of firm policy in Vietnam.

1, The Security Situation in Vietnam

The VC threat in Vietnam looked worse in April than it had in
January. We will see that Gilpatric's report painted a bleak picture.
Yet, there is no hint in the record that concern about the immediate situa-
tion in Vietnam was a major factor in the decision to formulate a new
program.

VC strength was estimated at 3-15,000 in Lansdale's January memo-
randum; 8-10,000 in a March NIE; 10,000 in an April briefing paper (appar-
ently by Lansdale) immediately preceding -- and recommending -- the Gilpatric
Task Force; then 12,000 one week later in the Gilpatric report proper. VC
incidents were reported high for April (according to the Task Force report,
650 per month, 4 times higher than January), but an upsurge in activity had
long been predicted to coincide with the Vietnamese elections. As would
happen in the future, the failure of the VC to prevent the elections was
considered a sign of government strength. 2/

On the basis of the Task Force statistics, we could assume that
the situation was deteriorating rapidly: taken literally, they indicate an
increase in VC strength of 20 percent in about a week, plus the large in-
erease in incidents. But neither cables from the field, nor the Washington
files show any sense of a sharply deteriorating situation. And, as we will
see, the initial Task Force Report, despite its crisis tone, recommended
no increase’in military strength for the Vietnamese, only more generous US
financial aid to forces already planned under the CIP.

2. The Administration's Special Interest in Counter-insurgency

A more important impetus to the Gilpatric effort than any sense
of deterioration in Vietnam seems to have been the Administration's
general interest in doing something about counter-insurgency warfare,
combined with an interest in finding more informal and more efficient means

8)
é TOP SECRET - Sensitive
