Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B. THE OPENING DIALOGUE ON PROGRAM 5

1. Reclamas to Program 4 - Fleshing Out

; The turn of the year policy debate over basic U.S. objectives
and strategic concepts was played out in the midst of a continuing
dialogue within DoD, one which focused upon the adequacy and composi-
tion of Program 4. An exchange of memoranda between the JCS and
SecDef in December 1966 and January 1967 fleshed out the profile of
the program to near the 470,000-man figure.

The major reclama to Secretary McNamara's 18 November Program }
decision was @ sharply worded JCSM in which the Chiefs attacked the
premise (ostensibly supported by the Secretary of Defense) that the
restoration of economic stability in SVN was of overriding importance.
They not only took issue with the use of the piaster ceiling employed
to develop the force limit, but firmly regarded the ceiling of 470,000
men as inadequate and restrictive, a situation which might necessitate,
in their words, "subsequent adjustments," especially in view of the
I C2Z tactical situation. Additionally, they noted:

",.-projected opening of land lines of communication
(LOCs) in II, III, and IV CTZs, important to military
operations and the Revolutionary Development Program, will
be curtailed. US operations in the IV CTZ will be impeded
and the capability to conduct riverine operations in this
ares, will be reduced to a critical degree. The over~all
US military capability to support extension of control by
the Government of Vietnam in SVN will be limited and flexi-
bility will be curtailed....

"...-while the restoration of economic stability in
SVN is most important, the echievement of such stability
will depend primarily on the capabilities of military and
paramilitary forces to defeat the enemy, to provide the secure
environment required for political, economic, and social
development, and, concurrently, to provide essential impetus
to the Revolutionary Development Program. Further, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff believe that, in comparison to the forces
requested by them on 4 November 1966, the forces listed in
Program 't will reduce the military cayzbility to achieve
our national objectives and execute our military tasks in
SVN. The rate at which Program |} can undertake area control,
open land LOCs, and provide essential security for Revolu-
tionary Development and other associated programs will be

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
