Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

*

.
)

on of war, NVN would know this was preparatory to some form
} of escalation and he would never act unilaterally and thereby
run risk of tipping America's hand. Although the matter
wes not specifically mentioned, Khanh appesred to accept
as entirely natural that he would not necessarily know in
advance if U.S. decided to strike outside VN. :
",,.Some question as to how enemy camp will react. et
At various points in conversation Khanh was obviously seeking
some more definite statement of specific American intentions
in immediate future. Secretary told him he could say nothing
on this because he simply did not know. The Honolulu meeting
would produce some firm recommendations to the President and
some plans, but ultimately only President could decide. His
decision would be influenced by consideration of ali impli-
cations of escalation: On our forces, on our allies, and
perhaps even on mankind itself if nuclear warfare should
: result. Only U.S, had the means to cope with problems esca-
lation would pose, and only President could make the ultimate
decisions.

"Nevertheleas, Secretary said he wished to empha-
size the following: :

A. Since 1945 U.S. had taken 165,000 casualties
in defense of free world against Communist encroachments,
, and most of these casualties were in Asia.

B. U.S, would never again get involved in a land
war in Asia limited to conventional forces. Our population
was 190,000,000. Mainland China had at least 700,000,000.
We would not allow ourselves to be bled white fighting them
with conventional weapons. as ala fre

ot ae

C. This meant that if escalation brought about’”
major Chinese attack, it would also involve use of nuclear
arms. Many free world leaders would cppose this. Chiang
Keai-Shek had told him fervently he did, and so did U Thant.
Many Asians seemed to see an element of racial discriminge-
tion in use of nuclear arms; something we would do to Asians
but not to Westerners. Khanh replied he certainly had no
quarrel with American use of nuclear arms, noted thet decisive
use of Atomic bombs on Japan had in ending war saved not
only American but also Japanese lives. One must use the
force one had; if Chinese used masses of Humanity, we would
use superior fire power.

ff

F D. Regardless what decisions were reached at
Honoluiu, their implementation would require positioning of
our forces. This would take time. Khanh must remember
we hed other responsibilities in Asia and must be eble re-

~~ act anywhere we had forces or commitments. Not by chance
2h TOP SECRET - Sensitive

————————
