Yo

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

McNamara indicated that he wanted your group to work with me
and that I should send down a memorandum suggesting some of the
questions that occurred to us. Here are our suggestions:

1. Ido not think the question is whether the 4-battalion
program (including 3d-country forces) is sufficient to do the
job, although the answer to that question should fall out of the
study. Rather, I think we should think in terms of the 4+
battalion build-up by the end of 1965, with added forces -- as
required and as our capabilities permit -- in 1966. Furthermore,
the study surely should look into the need for forces other than
ground forces, such as air to be used one way or another in-
country. I would hope that the study could produce a clear
articulation of what our strategy is for winning the war in
South Vietnam, tough as that articulation will be in view of
the nature of the problem.

2. I would assume that the questions of calling up reserves
and extending tours of duty are outside the scope of this study.

3. We must make some assumptions with respect to the number
of VC. Also, we must make some assumptions with respect to what
the infiltration of men and material will be especially if there
is a build-up of US forces in South Vietnam. I am quite con-
cerned about the increasing probability that there are regular
PAVN forces either in the II Corps area or in Laos directly
across the border from II Corps. Furthermore, I am fearful that,
especially with the kind of build-up here envisioned, infiltra-
tion of even greater numbers of regular forces may occur. As a
part of this general problem of enemy build-up, we must of course
ask how much assistance the USSR and China can be expected to give
to the VC. I suspect that the increased strength levels of the
VC and the more “conventional” nature of the operations implied
by larger force levels may imply that the often-repeated ratio of
"10 to 1" may no longer apply. I sense that this may be the case
in the future, but I have no reason to be sure. For example, if
the VC, even with larger forces engaged in more "conventional"
type actions, are able to overrun towns and disappear into the
jungles before we can bring the action troops to bear, we may
still be faced with the old "ratio" problen.

4. I think we might avoid some spinning of wheels if we
simply assumed that the GVN will not be able to increase its
forces in the relevant time period. Indeed, from what Westy
has reported about the battalions being chewed up and about their
showing some signs of reluctance to engage in offensive operations,
we might even have to ask the question whether we can expect them
to maintain present levels of men =~ or more accurately, present
levels of effectiveness.

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
