Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Asian ‘neutralist' countries to associate themselves with the

Treaty; it permits the accession of other states, thus avoiding

the charge that the Treaty members form an exclusive club with
aggressive designs ‘against’ other States;...These elements of

the Treaty attest to the importance the member States place on

the effect of the document upon their respective publics...The

success that the Treaty may have in enhancing the defense of the

area, will therefore haye to be judged in light of the fact that

it has psychological and economic as well as military objectives." 29/

a. Introductory Articles Alike

The initial article of both treaties is the same, word for
word.* The member nations promise not to use force in any manner incon-
sistent with the principles of the United Nations. Article 2 of NATO
conforms to Article III of SEATO: an undertaking to strengthen free insti-
tutions and promote economic progress, and is identical except for speci-
fic mention in SEATO of technical assistance and promotion of social
well-being, wording which is not in the NATO version. The reversal of.
the order of presentation of the second and third articles is interest-
ing. In NATO, the article committing the members to strengthen free in-
stitutions precedes the article on developing collective capacity to
resist attack. The order is changed in SEATO, perhaps emphasizing defense
over other considerations. Article 3 of NATO corresponds to Article II
of SEATO: an expression of resolve to develop @ collective capacity to
resist armed attack. There is, however, a significant difference in the
SEATO article with the addition of a clause applying the Treaty specifically
to subversion. This clause, in combination with the provision of SEATO
Article IV that the parties shall consult immediately on measures of com-
mon defense if threatened by other than armed attack, places subversive
aggression, in the form of externally fomented or supported insurgency,
or coup d'etat, within the purview of the treaty.

b. The Key Articles

Central to analysis of the two treaties is comparison of the
articles calling for action to meet an enemy threat. These are Articles
h and 5 of the NATO Treaty, and Article IV of the SEATO Treaty. In general,
the SEATO article has come under heavy criticism for lack of forcefulness.
As presented below, the SEATO article has been transposed to parallel
the two articles of NATO, but no words have been added or deleted.

NATO Art. 4 & 5 SEATO Art. IV
The Parties will consult together If, in the opinion of any of the
whenever, in the opinion of any of parties, the inviolability or

them, the territorial integrity, the integrity of the territory or

_*Appendix A, Comparison of the Wording of the NATO and SEATO Treaties

A-16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
