Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

When France was liberated and the drafting of a new constitution
was taken up, colonial policy played an important but confusing part.
Few of the deputies to the two constituent assemblies knew much about
colonial matters while the few “experts” were sharply divided. It must
be remembered that the average Frenchman believes what he was taught in
school - that France is the only colonial power that really understands
the natives, that the latter are universally grateful for the benefits
of French civilization and that any discontent is the work of a small
minority of professional agitators.

(

Those who realized that the era of colonialism was past and that
France must make fundamental changes in her policy if she were not to
lost her empire could make little impression on the general apathy and
ignorance. Even the Communists were hesitant about going too far against
public opinion by advocating independence for the colonies, and were
probably also doubtful about the wisdom of breaking up an empire which
they expected shortly to control,

The result of all these factors was a constitution which was
extremely vague, confused, and conflicting on colonial matters. It
provides for three classes of overseas territories - (a) the overseas
departments which are an integral part of France, (b) ‘the overseas
territories which have limited local autonomy, and (c) the Associated
States. The latter category was created to take care of Morocco, Tunis,
and the states of Indochina. No details were given as to their posi-
tion in the Union except that it should be determined an "Act" or
agreement with each Associated State,

The overseas territories (and, of course, the overseas depart-
ments) are represented in the Assembly and even more heavily in the
Conseil de la Republique, the upper branch of the French Parliament.

In addition, there is an Assembly of the French Union composed of
half colonial and half metropolitan members which, however, has only
consultative powers. Finally there is to be a Council of the French
Union composed of a representative of each Associated State, the
President of France, and certain cabinet members.

Tt was expected that the Vietnam would be the first Associated
State and that the agreement with it would establish precedents for
the entry of Morocco and Tunis. Unfortunately by the time the consti-
tution was adopted and in operation, the situation had already gotten
out of hand in Indochina. Ho Chi Minh was not willing to accept the
extremely limited authority which the French insistence on control of
defense, foreign affairs, and economic policy would leave him, and
incited by the inept policy of Admiral d'ARGENLIEU and his subordi-
nates, he made a surprise attack on December 19, 1946, which almost
succeeded in overruniing the French forces in Tonkin and Annam and
resulted in the murder of many innocent French civilians.

This abtack strengthened the influence of the conservative and
reactionary circles in France and Indochina and was followed by a
desperate attempt to pacify the country by military means, While the
control of most of the cities was regained, the countryside remained
in the hands of Ho's forces and open fighting gradually shifted to

bitter

161
