G&.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the basic Report. But on that day, there was a cable alerting CINCPAC
to be ready to move 5000-men tas: forces to Udorn, Thailand, and to
Touraine, (Da Nang), South Vietnam. Classified records available for this
study do not explain this alert. But the public memoirs indirectly refer
to it, and as would be expected, the alert was intended as a thredt to
intervene in Laos if the commmists failed to go through with the cease
fire which was to precede the Geneva Conference. Here is the cable:

From: JCS

TO: CINCPAC

INFO: CHMAAG VIENTIANE
CHJUSMAAG BANGKOK THAILAND
CHMAAG SAIGON VIETNAM

TOP SECRET JCS DA 995131 From JCS.

1. Request you prepare plens to move brigade size
forces of approximately 5,000 each into Udorn or
vicinity and into Tourane or vicinity. Forces
should include all arms and appropriate air
elements. Plans should be based solely on US
forces at this time.

2. Decision to make these deployments not fim.
It is expected that decision as to Thailand will
be made at meeting tentatively scheduled here on
Monday. Decision regarding Vietnam will be even
later due to consideration of Geneva Accords.

3. It is hoped that these movements can be given
SEATO cover but such possibility must be explored
before becoming a firm element of your planning.
State is taking action to explore this aspect.

4. Decision was not repeat not reached today
concerning implementstion of SEATO Plan 5/60.

The crisis in Leos was now et its peak. According to Schlesinger's
account, reports reached Washington April 26 that the Pathet Lao were
attacking strongly, with the apparent intention of grabbing most of the
country before the cease-fire went into effect. At 10 p.m. that night,
the JCS sent out a "general advisory" to major commands around the world,
and specifically alerted CINCPAC to be prepared to undertake airstrikes
against North Vietnam, and possibly southern Chine.

The next day -- the day the Task Force Report came to the President--
there were prolonged crisis meetings in the White House. The Presidens
later called in Congressional leaders, who advised against putting troops
into Laos. Schlesinger quotes Rostow as telling him the NSC meeting that
day was "the worst White House meeting he had ever attended in the entire
Kennedy administration." 122/

33
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
