Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Chinese Communists/ will react to some new or dramatic
way when we do so. Extensions of past practice, such

as Haiphong POL [petroleum, oil, and lubricants/, should
be a third stage. 38/

McNaughton and Bundy were in essential agreement: the
bombing should be resumed; it should be resumed on a low key at first;
but after a decent interval it should be escalated at least to the
extent of striking at the Haiphong POL storage facilities, and perhaps
other high-priority targets as well. In their own eyes the two Assistant
Secretaries were cautious, prudent men. Their recommendations were in
marked contrast to those of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who (as this paper
shows in greater detail later) pressed throughout the autumn and winter
of 1965-66 for permission to expand the bombing virtually into a program
of strategic bombing aimed at all industrial and economic resources as
well as at all interdiction targets. The Chiefs did so, it may be added,
despite the steady stream of memoranda from the intelligence community
consistently expresSing skepticism that bombing of any conceivable sort
(that is, any except bombing aimed primarily at the destruction of North
Vietnam's population ) could either persuade Hanoi to negotiate a settle-
ment on us/GvN terms or effectively limit Hanoi's ability to infiltrate
men and supplies into the South.

' These arguments of the Chiefs were essentially an exten-
sion and amplification of arguments for large-scale resumption received
from the field throughout the pause. Apparently, neither Lodge, Westmore-
land, nor Sharp received advance intimation that the suspension might
continue not for a few days, as in the preceding May, but for several weeks.
When notified that full-scale ground operations could recommence, following
the Christmas cease-fire, as soon as there was "confirmed evidence of
significant renewed Viet Cong violence," they were simply told that air
operations against North Vietnam would not immediately resume. They were
assured, however,

We will stand ready to order immediate renewal of
ROLLING THUNDER...at any time based on your reports and
recommendations. 39/

None of the three hesitated long relaying such recommenda-
tions. “Although I am not aware of all the considerations leading to the
continuation of the standdown in ROLLING THUNDER," General Westmoreland
cabled on December 27, "I consider that their immediate resumption is
essential." He continued,

¥ .our only hope of a major impact on the ability of
the DRV to support the war in Vietnam is continuous air
attack over the entire length of their LOC's from the
Chinese border to South Vietnam....Notwithstanding the
heavy pressure on their transportation system in the

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
