Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Although this cable was well-meaning in its intent, the Am-
bassador was amazed by its naivete and justifiably chagrined by its
impertinence. The following cable /reproduced at pages 72 through 7
one of many Taylor sent to Washington during the tumultuous days jus
prior to the April Honolulu Conference, is worth quoting in its en-
tirety as it contains the kind of guidance the Ambassador felt he should
have been receiving from Washington, 80/ ;

Thus was the Ambassador propelled into the conference of
20 April 1965, only one step ahead of the Washington juggernaut, which
was itself fueled by encouragement from Westmoreland in Saigon. Taylor
was not opposed to the U.S. build-up per se, but rather was concerned
to move slowly with combat troop deployments, which tended to cause
alarm in an already delicate situation, while proceeding quietly with
the prerequisite development of logistic bases to support later troop
introduction. He was overtaken at Honolulu.

Honolulu brought the Saigon and Washington decision makers
together to sanctify an expanded enclave strategy. In the preliminary
discussions they agreed that: 81/

(1) The DRV was not likely to quit within the next six
months; and in any case, they were more likely to give up because of
ve failure in the South than because of bomb-induced “pain” in the
North. It could take up to two years to demonstrate VC failure.

(2) The level of air activity through Rolling Thunder was
about right. The U.S. did not, in Ambassador Taylor's words, want "to
kill the hostage." Therefore, Hanoi and environs remained on the re-
stricted list. It was recognized that air activity would not do the
job alone.

(3) Progress in the South would be slow, and great care
should be taken to avoid dramatic defeat. The current lull in Viet
Cong activity was merely the quiet before a storm.

(4) The victory strategy was to "break the will of the
DRV/VC by denying them victory." Impotence would lead eventually to
a political solution.

Going into the Honolulu Conference the level of approved U.S.
forces for Vietnam was 40,200. In-country strength of 33,500 showed
that not all the approved forces had closed. To accomplish the "victory
strategy" described above, the conferees agreed that the following
additional U.S. deployments should be made:

A. United States
(1) An Army Brigade (3 Bns) to Bien Hoa - Vung Tau
to close by 1 May -

71 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
