Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

13

"5, It remains the policy of the United States in South Viet-Nam
as in other parts of the world, to support the efforts of the people of
that country to defeat aggression and to build a peaceful and free
society."

eo

43, President Kennedy's Remarks Prepared for Delivery at the Trade Mart |

* din Dallas, November 22, 1963, Public Papers of the Presidents
Kennedy, 1963, p. 890:

ne i

"T want to discuss with you today the status of our strength and our
security because this question clearly calls for the most responsible
qualities of leadership and the most enlightened products of scholarship.
For this Nation's strength and security are not easily or cheaply obtained,
nor are they quickly and simply explained. There are many kinds of strength
and no one kind will suffice. Overwhelming nuclear strength cannot stop a
guerrilla war. Formal pacts of alliance cannot stop internal subversion.
Displays of material wealth cannot stop the disillusionment of diplomats
subjected to discrimination.

"Above all, words alone are not enough. The United States is a
peaceful nation, And where our strength and determination are clear, our -
words need merely to convey conviction, not belligerence. If we are
strong, our strength will speak for itself. If we are weak, words will
be of no help.

"I realize that this Nation often tends to identify turning-points
in world affairs with the major addresses which preceded them. But it
wes not the Monroe Doctrine that kept all Europe away from this hemisphere
-- it was the strength of the British fleet and the width of the Atlantic
Ocean. It was not General Marshall's speech at Harvard which kept commu-
nism out of Western Europe -- it was the strength and stability made possible
by our military and economic assistance.

"Tn this administration also it has been necessary at times to issue
specific warnings -- warnings that we could not stand by and watch the
Communists conquer Laos by force, or intervene in the Congo, or swallow
West Berlin, or maintain offensive missiles on Cuba.. But while our goals
were at least temporarily obtained in these and other instances, our
successful defense of freedom was due not to the words we used, but to
the strength we stood ready to use on behalf of the principles we stand
ready to defend."

ee ‘
"But American military might should not and need not stand alone

against the ambitions of international communism. Our security and
strength, in the last analysis, directly depend on the security and

o-hs
