Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i
~~

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

most of the principal advisors, the earlier views had been clearly
contingent upon a major reversal--principally in Laos--and had been
advanced with the apparent assumption that military actions hopefully
would not be required. Now, however, their views were advanced with

a sense that such actions were inevitable. Moreover, they were advanced
despite the perspective afforded by a number of critical evaluations -of

the use of military pressure. In addition to the studies made during

the first half of 1964, all of the principal advisory agencies had reviewed
a detailed critique of the so-called "Rostow thesis" just prior to the
September strategy conference.

The critique was accomplished in osp/ISA with inputs and coordina-
tion from State's Policy Planning Council. The assigned task was to make
"a thorough analysis of and report on the Rostow thesis that covert
aggression justifies and must be fought by attacks on the source of the
aggression." Copies were distributed to the Washington recipients of the
Rostow paper, including the White House, Department of State, Department
of Defense, the JCS and each of the services.

In their summary analysis of the thesis the critiquers emphasized
two variables which would determine its utility: (1) the extent of the
commitment of the nation furnishing external support and (2) the extent
to which the insurgency affected vital U.S. interests. With regard to
the former variable, they described "three fundamental conditions" which
would have to exist to achieve success "in cases where the external opponent
is committed to the extent of the North Vietnamese." The opponents would
have to be persuaded that: (1) the United States was "taking limited
actions to achieve limited objectives;" (2) “the commitment of the military
power of the United States to the limited objective is a total commitment --
as total as our commitment to get the missiles out of Cuba in October 1962;"
(3) the United States has "established a sufficient consensus to see
through this course of action both at home and on the world scene." Fur-
ther, unless such an opponent were so persuaded, "the approach might well
fail to be effective short of a major U.S. military involvement." 132/

Essential to creating the necessary conviction of U.S. intent
on the part of the opposing government, the analysis argued, was a firm
image that the President and the U.S. public were in agreement that vital
national interests were at stake. Unless vital interests were clearly
at stake,

"the limited military actions envisaged would
not only involve much greater political costs at home and
abroad...but there would be mich greater risk that the
program would not be effective except at high levels of
involvement and risk, and that it might be allowed to fall
short of such levels."

In the analysts' view, "this requirement of vital, interest would sharply
limit the application of the thesis" among the world areas currently
threatened. It observed that "Laos-Vietnam seems the only one in which
a strong, but not necessarily conclusive, case can be made that this
condition holds." 133/

“35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
