Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Contributing to the firmness of the U.S. position were the
optimistic reports from the field on military progress in the war.
Both statistically and qualitatively, improvement was noted throughout
the last quarter of the year and a mood of cautious hope pervaded the
dispatches. Typical of these was Admiral Sharp's year end wrap-up
cable. Having primary command responsibility for the air war, CINCPAC
devoted a major portion of his message to the ROLLING THUNDER program
in 1967, presenting as he did not only his view of accomplishments in
the calendar year but also a rebuttal to critics of the concept and
conduct of the air war.

Admiral Sharp outlined three objectives which the air campaign
was seeking to achieve: disruption of the flow of external assistance
into North Vietnam, curtailment of the flow of supplies from North Vietnam
into Laos and South Vietnam, and destruction "in depth" of North Vietnamese
resources that contributed to the support of the war. 66/ Acknowledging
that the flow of fraternal communist aid into the North had grown every
year of the war, CINCPAC noted the stepped up effort in 1967 to neutralize
this assistance by logistically isolating its primary port of entry --
Haiphong. The net results, he felt, had been encouraging:

The overall effect, of our effort to reduce external
assistance has resulted not only in destruction and damage
+o the transportation systems and goods being transported
thereon but has created additional management, distribution
and manpower problems. In addition, the attacks have
created a bottleneck at Haiphong where inability effectively
to move goods inland from the port has resulted in congestion
on the docks and a slowdown in offloading ships as they
arrive. By October, road and rail interdictions had reduced
the transportation clearance capacity at Haiphong to about
2700 short tons per day. An average of 4400 short tons
per day had arrived in Haiphong during the year. 67/

The assault against the continuing traffic of men and materiel
through North Vietnam toward Laos and South Vietnam, however, had pro-
duced only marginal results. Success here was measured in the totals
of destroyed transport, not the constriction of the flow of personnel

and goods.

Although men and material needed for the level of
combat now prevailing in South Vietnam continue to flow
despite our attacks on LOCs, we have made it very costly
to the enemy in terms of material, manpower, management,
and distribution. From 1 January through 15 December
1967; 122,960 attack sorties were flown in Rolling Thunder

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
132
