Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. THe POL DEBATE -- NOVEMBER 1965 - JUNE 1966

Au Background

When the 37-day bombing pause was terminated at the end of
January 1966, the principal issue before decision-makers was not whether
+o intensify the bombing but whether the intensification should be
gradual as before or be sharply accelerated.

Some kind of escalation if the bombing pause failed, i.e.,
if the North Vietnamese did not give "concrete evidence of a willingness
+o come to terms," was foreshadowed by the October paper from State
recommending the pause:

We would have to convey our intent to reinstitute
the bombing if the North Vietnamese refused to negoti-
ate or if their willingness to negotiate is not accom-
panied by a manifest reduction of VC aggression in the
South. If it is necessary to reinstitute bombing, we
should be prepared to consider increasing the pressure,
e.g. through striking industrial targets, to make clear
our continuing, firm resolve. 1/

According to this thinking, failure of the pause would indicate that

the bombing had not exerted enough pressure; greater effort was needed
40 convince Hanoi that the U.S. intended not only to continue the bombing
but to do so on an increasing scale. Moreover, the pause had improved
the political atmosphere for escalation. U.S. willingness to negotiate
and NVN's unreasonableness had been amply and dramatically displayed

for all the world to see. If the U.S. now decided to intensify the
pombing, the decision could at least be presented as one that was made
reluctantly after trying to find a more peaceful alternative.

The debate over the form of escalation in early 1966 was a
continuation of the debate over bombing policy which had surfaced again
in the fall of 1965, and which had mixed into the debate over the long
pause. Regardless of any pause, it was clear by November that even the
gradual rate of escalation of 1965 was approaching a point at which any
further increase would be possible only by attacking the sensitive targets
in the Hanoi/He.iphong sanctuaries and the China buffer zone. As of the
end of October, 126 of the 240 existing JCS targets had been struck; and
of the remainiag 114, two thirds (75) were ia the off-limits areas, and
29 of the other 39 remaining were in the touchy northeast quadrant. 2/
As the debate gathered momentum in the winter of 1965 without a clear
decision to begin attacking "the hostage," the bombing actually levelled
off. During November and December only 8 more JCS targets were struck
and armed reconnaissance missions were held to a sortie ceiling of 1200
per two-week period. 3

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
