Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

military. The Ambassador said that proposed decrees had been prepared and that
if promulgated they would give the GVN adequate power. Details were not in-
cluded, however, in the Ambassador's report. The Ambassador proposed, on a
personal basis, that, if Washington approved, he would try to persuade Khanh
to proceed with a mass media presentation of it. 69/ Washington agreement to
the Embassy evaluation came three days later, although only the general con-
cept had been explained. On that same day, 4 April 1964, Khanh publicly pro-
claimed a basic decree prescribing broad categories of national service. Its
main terms were that all able-bodied males ages 20-45 were subject to nation-
al public service. This national public service was to consist of either

(a) military service or (b) civil defense service.

This initial decree of 4 April 1964 amounted evidently to nothing more
than a statement of intention by the Prime Minister. This was quite short
of a law that would go into effect, be administered and thereby made to ac-
complish something.

On 10 April, the Embassy was informed by a telegram from State that
Khanh's decrees had received little publicity in the United States, and the
Embassy was asked for a text of the implementing decrees. Five days later
on 15 April 1964, Ambassador Lodge reported in more detail on the basic
terms of the national public service decree, to wit:

(1) All able-bodied males 20-45 would be subject to national
public service and females would be permitted to volunteer.

(2) National public service would consist of either military
service or civil defense service.

(3) Civil defense service would be managed by the Ministry of
interior.

(4) The duration of military service would be three years of
RVNAF or four years in Regional Forces (Civil Guard) and Popular
Forees (Civil Defense Corps and Hamlet Militia).

(5) Call-up priority would be based on age and number of
dependents.

(6) Drafted personnel were to be paid by the force to which
they were assigned.

This came closer to a law to be administered, but on 28 April Washington
told the Embassy that the status of implementation of the recommendations was
still not clear. Four days later, on 2 May, Ambassador Lodge reported that
draft decrees were still not signed in fact, and that the final nature of
the Civil Defense Decree was still in doubt. However, he reported agreement
on the principle that the objectives of the National Mobilization Plan

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a9
