Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive

Ne agreed to delay its introduction temporarily so as not to embarrass
the Administration. 90/

The idea of a selective aid suspension to goad Diem into action was
actively discussed at State during the Krulek-Mendenhall mission, and
_ later John Mecklin had specifically suggested it to the NSC, 91/ On
September 8, AID Director David Bell warned in a TV interview thet the
Congress might cut aid to South Vietnam if the Diem government did not
change its policies. 92/ On Monday, September 9, however, the President,
in a TV interview for the new Huntley-Brinkley News, said, "I don't
think we think that (a reduction of U.S. aid to South Vietnam) would be
helpful at this time." 93/ On September 11, the day after the President
received the Krulak-Mendenhall reports, Lodge reversed his previous
position, and ina long cable proposed that detailed consideration be
given to ways in which non-militery aid suspension might be used as a
sanction to topple the government, gh/ He had concluded we could not
get satisfaction from Diem, and had to face up to the unpleasant task
of forcing events. This view was reinforced the next day in a long series
of cables replying to State's September 7 request for a comprehensive
evaluation of South Vietnamese attitudes. 95,

Lodge's proposal, and a proposal by Hilsman for a combined set of
public and private measures to bring pressure on Diem, formed the basis
of a White House meeting on September 11. 96/ On the following day,
Senator Church was given the green light and introduced his resolution,

On September 14, Lodge was informed that approval of the $18.5 million
remainder of the commercial import program (the principal piastre support,
anti-inflation aid device) was deferred until basic U.S. policy decisions
had been made, 97/ The decision on aid suspension was now absorbed into

_ the broader consideration of a set of coordinated measures to put pressure
on the GVN,

Throughout September, the division of opinion within the U.S,
mission in Saigon had grown sharper and sharper. Harkins, Richardson,
and to a lesser extent Brent (Director of USOM), did not believe that
the Diem government's bungling of the Buddhist crisis and loss of popular
support were threatening the war effort, or that the crisis was es serious
as Lodge, Mecklin, Mendenhall, et al., portrayed it. In any case, the
situation was not so irretrieyable as to require a U.S. abandonment of
' Diem in a risky venture at coup-making towards an unknown alternative, 98/
The opposite view was held by Lodge, Truehart, Mecklin, Phillips, and the
majority of the junior officers in the mission. By mid-September, the
debate had reached a shrill and acrimonious level, as the following
excerpt from a Harkins' cable to Taylor indicates:

As everyone else seems to be talking, writing and
confusing the issue here in Vietnam, it behooves me to also
get into the act. From most of the reports and articles
I read, one would say Vietnam and our programs here are
falling apart at the seams, Well, I just thoroughly
disagree, 99/

28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
