Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fertilizer program to increase the production of rice in areas safely
controlled by the government was to be expanded and announced very
soon.

Although VC successes in rural areas had been the prime feature
of the downswing over the past half year or more, pacification was’ to
receive less comparative emphasis, in fact, in the next year or so than
it had before. Nevertheless, Khanh's statement of a pacification
strategy -~ which was later to form a conceptual basis for the ill-
fated Hop Tac program -- was approved in principle, and a critique of
it was accorded a place as Annex B of NSAM 288.

In simplified outline, the plan was based on a "clear and hold"
concept, including for each area these steps:

1. Clearing organized VC units from the area by military action;

2. Establishing permanent security for the area by the Civil
Guard, Self Defense Corps, hamlet militia, and national police;

3- Rooting out the VC "infrastructure" in the hamlets (particu-
larly the VC tax collector and the chief of the VC political cadre);

4. Providing the elements of economic and social progress for the
people of the area: schools, health services, water supply, agricultural
improvements, etc.

These general ideas were to be (1) adapted and applied flexibly...
(2) applied under the clear, undivided and decentralized control of the
province chief; and (3) applied in a gradually spreading area moving
from secure to less secure areas and from more populated to less popu-
lated areas (the "oil drop" principle)...

The major requirements for success of the Pacification Plan were:

First, and of by far the greatest importance, clear, strong, and
continuous political leadership...

General Khanh and his top colleagues were to supply this require-
ment. Their ability to do so was'as yet untested, but some early
evidence was good...

A second major requirement for success of the Pacification Plan
was the adoption of government policies which would give greater pro-
mise of economic progress and greater:incentives to rural people. ‘The
three key areas were:

- the price of rice to farmers, which was artificially depressed
and held substantially below the world market price;

- uncertain or oppressive tenure conditions for many farmers (a
#

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
