Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"IT believe that there is not going to be any war.

"But there must be sober realization by the American people that
our legitimate purposes are again being tested by those who threaten
peace and freedoa everywhere.

"This has not beén the first test for us and for the free world.
Probably it will not be the lest. But as we meet each test with courage
and unity, we contribute to the safety and the honor of our beloved
land-~and to the cause of a just and lasting peace."

23. The President's News Conference of October 1, 1958, Public Papers
of the Presidents--Eisenhower, 1950, p. 715.
* * *

"THE PRESIDENE. Well, sir, all I can tell you about that is that
I conceive of no possible solution that we haven't studied, pondered,
discussed with others in the very great hope that a peaceful solution
ean come about.

"As you well know, the besic issue, as we see it, is to avoid
retreat in the face of force, not to resort to force to resolve these
questions in the. internationel world. And we believe if we are not
faithful to that principle in the long run we are going to suffer.

"Now, Mr. Dulles, who had a very long conference yesterday morn-
ing and almost solely on this subject, did one thing that I would
commend to all of you: he quoted paragraphs, two paragraphs I think,
from Mr. Spaak's speech recently in the United Netions, where Mr. Spaak
said: 'The whole free-world must realize that it is not Quemoy and the
Matsus that we are talking about, we are talking about the Communists’
constant, unrelenting pressure against the free world, against all of

"As a matter of fact, a magazine just,’ I guess, out last evening,
U.S. News and World Report, gives quite e detailed and documented aay
of Communist aggression and activities in 72 countries.

"T commend that to your reading, because we are very apt, by
focusing our eyes on some geographical point, to neglect the great
principles for which a country such as ours has stood, for e1i these
years, and for ;hich Western civilization has largely stood.

"So, I should say, we want to get these things in perspective.

p-42o
