Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Chiefs felt France alone would be unable to stabilize the situation,
that the VNA would fall apart without "US moral and materiel support,"
and that the "best interest of France as well as the United States" war-
ranted energetic action to restore internal order and prevent South Viet-
nam's loss to the free world. 12/

General Collins also opposed French withdrawal for three
reasons: first, the FEC was responsible under the Manila Pact for the
defense of Indochina and neither the US nor Britain were prepared to take
over that responsibility. Secondly, French military assistance (logistical
Support and training) was essential to the development of the Vietnamese
forces. Third, although the presence of French troops was a source of
bitterness to the Vietnamese, General Collins believed the FEC was a
Stabilizing influence on Vietnamese politics. 143/

Dulles' proposal to Faure on May 11 reflected these judg-
ments. Emphasizing that Indochina, for all its importance, must not be
allowed to damage Franco-American relations, that US support for Diem must
not be allowed to split the alliance, Dulles proposed that France continue
to support Diem until a National Assembly could be elected to determine
the ultimate political structure of South Vietnam, a structure which might
or might not include Diem. 14:/

Against his own views, against French public opinion and
on certain conditions, Faure accepted the proposal. The Prime Minister
insisted the Diem government be enlarged, elections be held as soon as
possible, the sect problem be resolved, anti-French propaganda cease,

Bao Dai be retained as chief of state, French and American officials deemed
disturbing to Franco-US harmony be removed from Vietnam (Lansdale, for one)
and that the US assure him French economic, cultural and financial relations
with South Vietnam would be nurtured. Agreeing to these stipulations,
Dulles added Diem was not a US puppet and he could not guarantee conditions
involving Vietnamese action would be met. Then, saying the problem in
Vietnam did not lend itself to a contractual agreement between France and
the United States, Dulles suggested each should state its policy and pro-
ceed accordingly. In effect, said Dulles, the days of joint policy are
over; the US will act (more) independently of France in the future. 146/

F. The Twilight of French Presence in Vietnam

Back in Vietnam, Diem was doing well. He had dealt the Binh Xuyen
& coup de grace; the Army was pleased with its success against Bay Vien,
supported Diem and rather relished the chance to continue the fight against
remaining sect armies. Diem launched a campaign against the sect armies
on May 8, to regain control of wayward provinces and solidify Saigon's
control throughout the country. The US, again, gave Diem unqualified sup-
port and the French, again, reluctantly backed him. Bao Dai was a minor

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

37
