Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

shown their convictions by sending military units to assist the South
Vietnamese. Their efforts, joined with ours and with the South Viet-
namese, have ended the threat of a Communist military takeover."

ee Ot

"In the broad picture what is the role of Viet-Nam? Behind the
great and emerging changes I have sketched lies an atmosphere of growing
confidence, a sensing by the peoples of free Asia that progress is possi-
ble and that security can be maintained. Our action in Viet-Nam has been
vital in helping to bring about that confidence. For, as virtually all
non-Communist governments in the area realize, their security requires a
continuing United States ability to act, not necessarily an American
presence, although that, too, may be required in individual cases, but
an ability to act for a long time. And that we must--and, I think, shall--

provide.

"That increasing confidence also depends deeply on the belief that
essential economic assistance will continue to be provided. Without what
we have done in Viet-Nam and the assistance we have provided throughout
the region, I doubt very much if a considerable number of the favorable
developments I have spoken of would heave occurred, and certainly they
would not have come so rapidly. I think that responsible people in
East Asia would agree strongly with this judgment.

"I cannot too strongly stress this ‘confidence factor.’ It is an
intangible, the significance of which is difficult to perceive unless
one has visited the countries of Asia recently or, better still, peri-
odically over an interval.

“Today, the increase in confidence among the non-Communist nations
of Asia is palpable. Communist Chinese past failures and present diffi-
culties play a part, but our own role in Viet-Nam is a major element
even as the war goes on.”

~~ +

71. Secretary Rusk Interview by Paul Niven, Televised from the Depart-
ment of State to 75 Affiliated Stations of National Educational

Television on Mey 5, 1967; "A Conversation with Dean Rusk,” Depart-
ment of State Bulletin, May 22, 1967, p. 774.
<“— ¢ *

"Secretary Rusk: ....They have no business being there. They have
no right to try to seize South Viet-Nam by force. We are entitled under
tle SEATO treaty as well as under the individual and collective security-
self-defense arrangements of the U.N. Charter, to come to the assistance
of South Viet-Nam upon their request when they are subjected to this kind
of aggression." ;

D-109
