Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

economic and. political means. Finally:

"To insure the peaceful development of nations, free from
coercion, the United States has taken a leading part in establish-
ing the United Nations. The United Nations is designed to make
possible freedom and independence for all its members. We shall
not realize our objectives, however, unless we are willing to
help free peoples to maintain their free institution and their
national integrity against aggressive movements that seek to im-
pose upon them totalitarian regimes."

b. Marshall Plan, 1947

The U.S. Secretary of State on June 5, 1947, proposed the
cooperative international economic aid subsequently entitled the European
Recovery Program (ERP), but known widely as the Marshall Plan. ERP was at
first explicitly designed to permit and even attract Soviet cooperation:

"Our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine
but against hunger, poverty, desparation and chaos. Its purpose
should be the revival of a working economy in the world so as to
permit the emergence of political and social conditions in which
free institutions can exist." 4/

But the Soviet rebuffed the Marshall Plan, turned Bloc propaganda against
it as an adjunct of the Truman Doctrine, and by so doing, bifurcated Europe.
Moreover, among three top-level U.S. committees examining ways of bringing
U.S. resources to bear on European recovery, the Committee on Foreign Aid
(Harriman Committee) found that:

"The interest of the United States in Europe...cannot be
measured simply in economic terms. It is also strategic and.
political. We all know that we are faced in the world today
with two conflicting ideologies...Our position in the world has
been based for at least a century on the existence in Europe of
@ number of strong states committed by tradition and inclina-
tion to the democratic concept..." 5/

The bipolar world had begun to emerge. In January, 1948, the British
Foreign Secretary, following talks with the U.S. Secretary of State, pro-
posed an alliance among the U.K., France, and the Benelux nations, refer-
ring to "the conception of the unity of Europe and the preservation of
Europe as the heart of western civilization.” 6/ At the end of February,
1948, western Europe was shocked by the fall of the Czechoslovakian govern-
ment to a communist coup d'etat. In March, the British-proposed alliance
was contracted as the Brussels Pact, a fifty~year treaty of collective
defense and economic collaboration. U.S. approval was immediate; the
President told Congress that:

"Its significance goes far beyond the actual terms of the
agreement itself. It is a notable step in the direction of

A-6 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
