Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of a new National Army. However .. « there would seem
to be no insuperable objection to the U.S. undertaking
a training program. . . while at the same time the
French Forces commence a gradual phasing out from that
theater. 26/

ec. The NSC Backs Dulles

Adoption of NSC 5h29/2 indicates the U.S. Government
found Dulles' views more persuasive than those of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff. But while it was agreed to "work through the French only
insofar as necessary" to build up indigenous forces, the program for
bolstering the Vietnamese army was not developed for several months.

d. JCS-State Split on Force level, Mission for VNA

: On September 22, in a memorandum recommending
establishnent of a MAAG, Cambodia (if "all French advisors ultimately"
are withdrawn, if the U.S. deals directly with Phnom Penh and if these
caveats are written into a bilateral agreement with Cambodia), the JCS
recommended against assignment of training responsibilities to the
Saigon MAAG because of the “unstable political situation" in South
Vietnam. 27/ Instability was noted "with concern" by the JCS in a
second September 22 memorandum dealing with development of forces in
Indochina, as was the cease-fire agreement (called "a major obstacle
to the introduction of adequate US MAAG personnel and of additional
arms and equipment"). 28/ Because of these factors, the Chiefs con-
sidered "this is not a propitious time to further indicate United
States intentions with respect to the support and training of Viet-
namese forces."

But the JCS had been directed by the NSC to address
the question of Vietnamese force levels; against their best wishes, one
supposes, this memorandum forwarded their views. A 23/,000-man army
was proposed for Vietnam; the annual cost of training and maintaining
this force -- assuming France turned over to the VNA arms and equipment
furnished under the U.S. Military Development Assistance Program since
1950 ~- was put at $h20 million. Another $23.5 million would be
needed to train and equip the Navy and Air Forces. Further, the JCS
wanted speedy relinquishment of French over-all command of the VNA and
speedy withdrawal of French forces as the Vietnamese "are capable of
exercising command of an effective force." Finally, the JCS requested
"a definite agreement . . . be obtained from the French Government
with respect to the timing of their programmed phased withdrawal"
before U.S. assumption of training responsibilities. 29/

Dulles objected to these proposals:

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
