Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(1) The strikes were to be packaged in a week's program at
a time;

(2) precise timing of the strikes were to be left to field
commander's 5

(3) the requirement for US-VNAF simulteneity was to be
dropped;

(4) the strikes were no longer to be specifically related
to VC atrocities;

- (5) publicity on the strikes was to be progressively reduced;
and .

(6) the impression henceforth to be given was one of regularity
and determination.

Here is the full text of the Secretary of State's message to Ambassa-
dor Taylor, describing the new program: 98/

Having in mind considerations raised your reftel [faylor's
Saigon 2889 of March 8th, quoted onpp.66-67/ and recommenda-
tions of General Johnson following his return, longer range
program of action against North Viet Nam has been given pri-
ority consideration here-and program for first week for
ROLLING THUNDER VII, has been decided, for execution this
week. Details this program which includes one US and one
VNAF strike together with one US and two VNAF route armed
recce is subject of instructions being sent through militery
channels. You will note these instructions leave to military
commands in field decisions as to specific timing within period
covered. Execution of first action under ROLLING THUNDER VII
may take place anytime from daylight March 19 Saigon time.
Although program contains full measure VNAF participation,
requirement thet US and VNAF operations proceed simultaneously
is dropped.

_ You are requested to see Pri Min ASAP in order to outline
to him this further program we have in mind and to solicit GVN
participation as specified therein. You should convey to PriMin
that proposed program, on which you will be providing him with
further information in successive weeks, is designed to maintain
pressure on Hanoi and versuade North Vietnamese regime that
costs of continuing their aggression becoming unacceptably high.
At same time Guat should understand we continue seek no enlarge-
ment of struggle and have carefully selected targets with view
to avoiding undesirable provocation. Further objective is to
continue reassure Government and people South Viet Nam we are

Wee TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
