Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. Westmoreland's Concept

This concept of operations was interpreted by General Westmore-
land in his MACV Directive 525-. of 20 September 1965, in which he set
forth the tactics and techniques for employment of US forces in the
Republic of Vietnam. General Westmoreland's strategy consisted of three
successive steps:

1. First, to halt the VC offensive -- to stem the tide,

2. Second, to resume the offensive -- to destroy VC and
pacify selected high priority areas,

3. Third, to restore progressively the entire country to
the control of the GyN. 26/

The tasks which he saw necessary included the defense of military bases,
the conduct of offensive operations against VC forces and bases, the
conduct of clearing operations as a prelude to pacification, provision

of permanent security for areas earmarked for pacification, and the pro-
vision for reserve reaction forces. Most of the document is concerned
with the conduct of offensive operations against VC base areas and forces.
The conduct of clearing operations were given little attention since these
were planned to be primarily accowplished by RVN regional forces and
popular forces.

3. The JCS on Future Operations and Force Deployments

By early November, the Joint Chiefs had further refined their
"Concept for Vietnam" and in JCsM 811-65, dated 10 November, 27/ submitted
their recommendations to the Secretary of Defense. Although it was
billed as establishing a basis for determining the Phase II force require-
ments, it achieved little more than explicating in some detail the tasks
to be accomplished in Phase II, and evaluating the degree to which the
forces already programned for Phase II would accomplish these goals.
However, the figures used were close to those discussed in July. The new
figures were 112,430 personnel and 28 battalions, most of which would be
in Vietnam by the end of 1965. These figures were still being used as late
as 20 November 1965. 28/

The JCS did manage to capture the essence of the Phase II concept
by pointing out that "Phase I...was designed to stop losing the war.
Phase II...is then the phase needed to start winning it." Their concept
still included the three basic military tasks of pressuring North Vietnam,
defeating the VC and extending GVN control over South Vietnam, and
deterring Communist China. However, the memorandum went on to spell out
in which areas of Vietnam the JCS and presumably MACV felt were the
“militarily and economically significant areas in Vietnam." These were
listed as Saigon, the Mekong Delta, Coastal Plain, and the Central

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
