Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It appears that Gracey's instructions from the Allied Command in Southeast
Asia explicitly limited his mission to the disarming of the Japanese, and
certainly did not require him to undertake revision of the Vietnamese
political system. 36) But in fact, General Gracey used his troops and
his position to overturn the Committee of the South, Neither communism nor
Viet nationalism seems to have concerned the British commander. On

10 September, the Viet Minh had accepted a reorganization of the Committee
of the South in which Tran Van Giau was replaced as Chairman by Phan Van
Bach, @ prominent independent nationalist, and ICP members occupied only
four of thirteen Committee seats. Gracey apparently regarded the Viet-
namese government with disdain, if not contempt, not because of its
political complexion, but because of its lack of authority from the French,
and because of the civil disorder over which it presided. The British
commander ordered the Japanese to assist in maintaining order, and directed
the disarming of Vietnamese; both directives were ignored, but added to
the mounting tension.

The attitude of the occupation forces reinforced the position of the
Trotskyites who had denounced the Viet Minh, the ICP, and the Committee
of the South as a “bourgeois-democratic government, even though the com-
munists are now in power," and decried any attempts to cooperate with the
Allies. The Trotskyite International Communist League called for the arm-
ing of the people, and incited the populace against the British. Beginning
on 12 September, the Vietnamese police in Saigon launched a violent cam-
paign to suppress the Trotskyites, in which many Trotskyite leaders were
killed. In the rural areas, fighting broke out between Viet Minh troops
and the forces of the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao. The spreading intra-Viet
violence rendered futile further attempts to draw together the Vietnamese
factions, and heightened apprehension among Westerners in Saigon.

On 17 September 1945, the Committee of the South called a general
strike to protest the Allied lack of cooperation, and arrested some sixteen
French. The French then importuned Gracey to permit them to step in to
restore order. On 19 September, the French "Commissioner" for Cochinchina,
Cedile, announced that there would be no negotiations with Vietnamese
nationalists until civil order was restored. On 20 September, General
Gracey suspended all Vietnamese newspapers, and took over the Vietnamese
police force. On 21 September, martial law was declared, outlawing all
demonstrations, and the bearing by Vietnamese of any weapon whatsoever,
including bamboo rods. On 22 September, the British freed some 1400 French
parachutists that had been incarcerated outside Saigon by the Japanese,
and these promptly descended on the city to beat Vietnamese wherever they
could lay their hands on them. On the morning of 23 September, French
troops occupied the police stations, the post office, and other public
buildings, and began to arrest Vietnamese politicians and public officials,
although members of the Committee of the South escaped. The official British
account noted that:

"T+ was indeed unfortunate that the manner in which this
coup d'etat was executed together with the behavior of the

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-37
