Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

psychological preparation in terms of the benefits to be gained.
Since most of these projects call for sacrifice on the part of

the population (in the form of allegedly 'volunteer' labor in the
case of construction, time away from jobs or school in the case

of rural youth groups, leaving homes and lands in the case of
regrouping isolated peasants), they are bound to be opposed unless
they represent a partnership effort for mutual benefit on the part
of the population and the government. (See subsequent section on
"GVN Reactions' for indications of Diem's current awareness of this
problem. )

"The situation may be summed up in the fact that the government
has tended to treat the population with suspicion or to coerce it
and has been rewarded with an attitude of apathy or resentment.

The basic factor which has been lacking is a feeling of rapport
between the government and the population. The people have not
identified themselves with the government. There has been a
general lack of ‘a sense of mission' in the building of the country
among both the local population and local authorities." (Ibid.,
pp- 9, 10, 11, 12; footnotes excluded)

&. Special National Intelligence Estimate, August 1960

The Country Team report on internal security concluded that
Diem was now aware of the gravity of the problem and was taking some
countermeasures. But the inadequacy of his response was recognized in
a Special NIE of 23 August 1960 (SNIE 63.1-60). The VC terrorism had
continued to intensify: in the first five months of 1960, 780 govern-
ment officials and sympathizers were assassinated by insurgents. Since
January armed attacking units had been operating over wider areas than
at any time since 195),

" . . . Support from North Vietnam appears to have increased
over the past several months. In particular, senior cadres and
military supplies such as communications equipment are believed
to be moving south through Iaos and Cambodia and by junk along
the eastern coastline." (SNIE 63.1-@0, p. 3)

But along with this further increase in communist pressure
came increasing threats to stability from non-communist quarters
reminiscent of the 1954-55 period:

"4. . At the same time, grievances against the government,
which have long been accumulating, have become increasingly
urgent and articulate."

Throughout this August estimate, dual threats fron com-
munist and domestic opposition were presented in parallel, with priority

L8 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
