Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from Toward Peace in Indochina, 1966, by Anthony Eden, Earl of Avon

Pages 22-2)

IfPeking is obsessed by its wrongful impression of American intentions,
Hanoi's opinion may eventually prove less decided. Moscow's judgment has
influence in North Vietnam which can at times balance Peking's. If China's
support is the tougher and more resolutely proclaimed, a number of Hanoi's
communist leaders are Moscow trained, including Ho Chi Minh himself. More-
over, historic instincts can be strong, however Left the leaders. The
Vietnamese might not relish a fate which could relegate them to serve as
China's southernmost imperial outpost, even for a time.

There are risks also for North Vietnam in the growing Sino-Soviet
bitterness. Recently the Chinese Government have even ignored all anniver-
saries of friendship with their Vietnam campaign a cause of complaint against
Russia, while dawdling Soviet supplies on their journey. That is not cozy
for Hanoi, which has no wish to quarrel with either communist great power
but could find the extreme Chinese demands increasingly prickly to live
with.

The parallel which is sometimes drawn between Marshal Tito and Moscow
and Ho Chi Minh and Peking is not, however, close. North Vietnam is at
war and in no position to quarrel with its chief provider of arms and sup-
plies. Even in less arduous conditions, China would still be the big neigh-
bor, as well as the big brother, and difficult to defy, if such a thing
could, be even dreamed of. All the same there is more scope for eventual
agreement with Hanoi than with Peking, despite the tragic trail of blood
and suffering, or maybe because of it.

It is Vietnam, not China, which has had the losses in life and in
wealth, from schools to communications. Some day, somehow this has to etd.
Moreover, even the North has much to gain from forming part of a girdle
of neutral states, or at least from seeing such a girdle formed to the
south and southwest of its territory. For this to be possible, Hanoi must
accept two glimpses of reality, though they need never be publicly pro-
claimed. The first is that the United States cannot be beaten, the second
is that while a United States military withdrawal might find its place in
a phased timetable within an agreement, there is not a remote chance of
even a partial American withdrawal unless North Vietnam plays its part,
although a negative one, to make this possible.

C-27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
