Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

more than 75% of the economic aid the U.S. provided in the same period
went into the GVN military budget; thus at least $8 out of every $10

of aid provided Vietnam went directly toward security. In addition,
other amounts of nominally economic aid (e.g., that for public’administra-
tion) went toward security forces, and aid for agriculture and trans-
portation principally funded projects with strategic purposes and with an
explicit military rationale. For example, a 20-mile stretch of highway
from Saigon to Bien Hoa, built at General Williems' instance for ~
specifically military purposes, received more U.S. economic aid than

all funds provided for labor, community development, social welfare,
health, and education in the years 1954-1961.

In March 1960, Washington became aware that despite this impressive
outpouring of treasure, material, and advice, the Viet Cong were making
significant headway against Diem, and that U.S. aid programs ought to be
reconfigured. In March, the JCS initiated action to devise a Counter-
insurgency Plan (CIP), intended to coordinate the several U.S. agencies
providing assistance to the GVN, and rationalize the GVN's own rural
programs. The CIP was worked out among the several U.S. agencies in
Washington and Saigon during the summer and fall of 1960.

The heightened awareness of problems in Vietnam did not, however,
precipitate changes in NSC policy statements on Vietnam. Objectives
set forth in NSC 6012 (25 July 1960) were virtually identical to those
of NSC 5809.

Planning proceeded against a background of developing divergence
of view between the Departments. of State and Defense. As Ambassador
Durbrow and his colleagues of State saw the problem on the one hand,
Diem's security problems stemmed from his political insolvency. They
argued that the main line of U.S. action should take the form of pressures
on Diem to reform his government and his party, liberalizing his handling
of political dissenters and the rural populace. Department of Defense
officials, on the other hand, usually deprecated the significance of
non-comunist political dissent in South Vietnam, and regarded Diem's
difficulties as proceeding from military inadequacy. In this view,
what was needed was a more efficient internal defense, and, therefore,
the Pentagon tended to oppose U.S. leverage on Diem because it might
jeopardize his confidence in the U.S., and his eooperation in improving his
military posture. Communist machination, as Defense saw it, had created
the crisis; the U.S. response should be "unswerving support" for Diem.

While the CIP was being developed, Department of Defense moved to
adapt the U.S. military assistance program to the exigencies of the
situation. On 30 March 1960 the JCS took the position that the Army
of Vietnam should develop an anti-guerrilla capability within the regular
force structure, thus reversing an antithetical position taken by General

Ss TOP SECRET - Sensitive
