Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The whole episode of French withdrawal from Vietnam, in fact,
soured the Western alliance. It is possible that France's
rejection of the European Defense Community on August 30, 1954, may
have been in part payment for Soviet good offices on behalf of France
at Geneva. But it is certain that many French were persuaded that
the U.S. and the UK furnished inadequate support to France during
the latter phases of the war, and at the Conference. And it is
equally certain that American policy in the aftermath of Geneva
widely alienated affection for the U.S. in France, and created that
lack of confidence which the Suez crisis of summer, 1956, translated
into outright distrust.

After the Geneva Conference, all the governments involved in
the Accords, with one significant exception, anticipated that France
would remain in Vietnam. The exception was the State of Vietnam,
whose Premier, Ngo Dinh Dien, was determined to uproot French
influence as a concomitant to the establishment of a genuinely
independent nationalist government. The policy of the United States
was initially directed toward a partnership with France, a joint
sponsorship of Diem and the newly independent nation he headed.

Almost at once, however, U.S. policy began to respond to
military urgency, and this in turn caused the U.S. to move beyond
partnership to primacy. In September of 1954, SEATO was brought into
being, its protection extended to Vietnam by a protocol to the Manila
Pact. The U.S. resolved through SEATO to balk further expansion of
communist dominion, and looked to transforming Vietnam into a key
redoubt in the line of containment. The U.S. was determined that
Vietnam would become politically sound, economically self-sufficient,
and militarily capable of providing for its own internal security,
coping with invasion from North Vietnam, and contributing to the
deterrent strength of the SEATO coalition. France, then beset with
internal political divisions, and plagued.with Algeria, evidenced
doubt, indecision, and occasional reluctance in aiding Vietnam toward
the foregoing objectives. The U.S. was not prepared to wait. In
late September 1954, the U.S. cut out the French as middle-men in
all its assistance for Vietnam, and began to deal directly with Diem,
his government, and his armed forces.

France did not readily accept this enlarged American role, nor
was there complete agreement with the U.S. Government that the

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
