Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Premier Diem is the best hope that we have in South
Vietnam, He is the leader of his people. He deserves and
must have the wholehearted support of the American Government
and our foreign policy. This is no time for uncertainty or
half-hearted measures..-.He is the only man on the political
horizon of Vietnam who can rally a substantial degree of sup-
port of his people...If we have any comments about the
leadership in Vietnam let it be directed against Bao Dai....
If the Government of South Vietnam has not room for both
these men, it is Bao Dai who must go...." 25

On 9 May 1955, the Joint Chiefs of Staff judged that "the government

of Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem shows the greatest promise of achieving
the internal stability essential for the future security of Vietnam." 26/
Five months later, on 11 October, 1955, the National Intelligence Estimate
was revised. In NIE 63.1-3-55, "Probable Developments in Vietnam to July
1956," the U.S. Intelligence Advisory Comittee found it possible to be
more sanguine concerning Diem's prospects:

"..,Diem has made considerable progress toward estab-
lishing the first fully independent Vietnamese government....
He faced a basically unstable and deteriorating situation....
The most significant articulate political sentiments of the
bulk of the population was an antipathy for the French combined
with a personal eee for Ho Chi Minh as the symbol of Viet-
namese nationalism.

"Diem was forced to move slowly. Although possessing con-
siderable national prestige as a patriot, he was inexperienced
in administration and was confronted at the outset by the
intrigues of Bao Dai and other self-interested individuals and
groups, who in many cases benefited from French support....

"Diem concentrated on eliminating or neutralizing the most
important groups and individuals challenging the authority of
his government....By bribery, persuasion, and finally force,
Diem virtually eliminated the Binh Kuyen and the most important
elements of the Hoa Hao sects as threats to his authority. At
the same time, he maneuvered the Cao Dai--the strongest of the
sects--into an uneasy alliance. As a result of these successful
actions, Diem gained prestige and increased popularity as a sym-
bol of Diem's efforts to establish a viable anti-communist
government are still in doubt....

"Provided the Communists do not exercise their capabilities
to attack across the 17th Parallel or to initiate large-scale
guerrilla warfare in South Vietnam, Diem will probably make
further progress in developing a more effective government. His
position will probably be strengthened as a result of increased

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
