Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"We have no more interest here... We have abandoned all
our colonial positions completely. There is little rubber or
coal or rice we can any longer obtain. And what does it amount
to compared to the blood of our sons we are losing and the three
hundred and fifty million francs we spend a day in Indochina?
The work we are doing is for the salvation of the Vietnamese
people. And the propaganda you Americans make that we are still
colonialists is doing us tremendous harm, all of us -- the
Vietnamese, yourselves, and us." 26/

Moreover, De Lattre was convinced that the Vietnamese had to be brought
into the fight. In a speech -- "A Call to Vietnamese Youth" -- he declared:

"This war, whether you like it or not, is the war of Vietnam
for Vietnam. And France will carry it on for you only if you
earry it on with her.... Certain people pretend that Vietnam
cannot be independent because it is part of the French Union.
Not true! In our universe, and especially in our world of
today, there can be no nations absolutely independent. There
are only fruitful interdependencies and harmful dependencies....
Young men of Vietnam, to whom I feel as close as I do to the
youth of my native land, the moment has come for you to defend
your country." 2

Yet, General De Lattre regarded U.S. policy vis-a-vis
Bao Dai with grave misgivings. Americans, he held, afflicted with
"inissionary zeal," were "fanning the fires of extreme nationalism...
French traditionalism is yital here. You cannot, you must not destroy it.
No one can simply make a new nation overnight by giving out economic aid
and arms alone." 28/ As adamantly as Carpentier, De Lattre opposed
direct U.S. aid for Vietnamese forces, and allowed the Vietnamese military
little real independence.

Edmund A. Gullion, U.S. Minister Counselor in Saigon
from 1950 on, faulted De Lattre on his inability to stimulate in the
Vietnamese National Army either the elan vital or dynamisme he communicated
to the rest of the French Expeditionary Corps:

"... It remained difficult to inculcate nationalist ardor
in a native army whose officers and non-coms were primarily
white Frenchmen... The Vietnamese units that went into action
‘were rarely unsupported by the French. American contact with
them was mainly through the French, who retained exclusive
responsibility for their training. We felt we needed much
more documentation than we had to assess the army's true potential.
We needed battalion-by-battalion reports on the performance of the
Vietnamese in training as well as in battle and a close contact
with intelligence and command echelons, and we never got this.
Perhaps the most significant and saddest manifestation of the
French failure to create a really independent Vietnamese Army

A-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
