Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Continuing, he reviewed various programs (MARKET TIME, GAME
WARDEN, DANIEL BOONE, SEA DRAGON) and the detailed plans to broaden
them, but once more the Pacific commander returned to the subject of
the sanctuaries:

"The problem of sanctuaries has been mentioned
several times. Those in NVN and Laos are limited sanc-
tuaries since they are subject to air attacks, albeit,
with certain restrictions. The sanctuary in Cambodia,
however, is complete. It would appear appropriate to
undertake actions at an early date aimed at persuading
the Cambodian leadership to adopt a more neutral position.
Pursuant to a request by DOD it is understood that a
Joint State, Defense, and CIA committee is considering
this problem. It is hoped that recommendations from this

_ group will be forthcoming at an early date which will
indicate positive measures which may be taken. The impor-
tance of Cambodia as sanctuary and as a source of supplies,
particularly rice, cannot be overemphasized. Consequently,
we must get on with a strong program to inhibit this use
of Cambodia, preferably by non-belligerent political and
diplomatic means. If we do not achieve the required degree
of success by these means then we must be prepared in all
respects to use the necessary degree of force to attain
our objectives.

"In summary, the problem of countering infiltration
of enemy forces into SVN is just one aspect of the total
military problem in SRASIA. While infiltration cannot
be absolutely stopped by direct military action, it can
be made costly and its effectiveness blunted. The enemy's -
prodigious efforts to provide air defense and to repair
damaged LOC's are strong evidence of the effectiveness of
our air campaigns in NVN, Laos and SVN. Increasing inter-
diction of his supply system, especially by closing his
ports, would be the most effective measure we could take
against his capability to infiltrate. Additionally, shifting
Rolling Thunder emphasis to attack selective target systems
should have a significant impact upon his will to continue
support to the insurgency in SVN. The more successful our
operations become in NVN and laos, the more use the enemy
will seek to make of his supply sources and channels in
Cambodia. To achieve our objectives in SEASIA our current
strategy, a combination of carefully balanced military
programs must be pursued in close coordination with politi-
cal, economic, and sociological programs." 3h/

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
38
