Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

paramount but political and psychological pressures for the pull-out

were probably more important. There was strong sentiment in France

for sending the FEC to North Africa where it could serve the interests

of France and the French Union. In Vietnam, French soldiers served the
free world but were hated by the Vietnamese and ignored by the very powers
they aided, powers which did not care enough to properly defray French
expenses. 73/

Paris was more upset by the Minute of Understanding.
During November discussion with Dulles, Mendes-France had said he doubted
full autonomy could be assumed by the Vietnamese by July 1955 and believed *
a readjustment of MAAG personnel for the new training mission might violate
the Geneva Accords. These arguments were reiterated at December Trilateral
meetings. But Mendes-France's real trouble was agreeing to phase out
French instructors. Neither the French people nor French soldiers would
understand why France was denied influence while required to support such
a heavy burden in Vietnam. Mendes-France and General Ely insisted that
if French instructors were eliminated the U.S. automatically would have
assumed primary responsibility for free world policy toward Indochina. qh/
(Dulles and General Collins rejected that line of reasoning but convinced
neither the French nor others that it was fallacious.)

Collins compromised in the Minute of Understanding by
agreeing to softer language (both French and American instructors would
be removed as Vietnamese efficiency increased), hoping to assuage Paris.
He failed. When the Minute was forwarded for final approval Mendes-France
stalled. First he had to study it closely to ensure no conflict with
Geneva was involved. Then on January 7, the French submitted a redraft
of the Minute which omitted reference to General O'Daniel's authority over
French personnel. 75/

Collins was already annoyed by hedging in December,
tantamount to a slap in the face of Ely to whom full authority to negoti-
ate the agreement had been delegated. 76/ He refused to "agree to (the
redraft) unless specifically instructed by higher authority" because lines
of authority were not spelled out. 77/ Yet Ely thought Paris had approved
the original agreement. He urged Collins to continue negotiations with
the Vietnamese on the basis of the first Minute, advice Collins followed
despite the Paris-Washington snafu. On January 19 and 20 a formal exchange
of letters finalized the agreement for U.S. assumption of training duties
and financial support ($214.5 million) for the Vietnamese forces. The
forces would be scaled down to 100,000 by December 1955. Both cost and
force levels were raised from Collins' November recommendations in deference
to Vietnamese arguments. 78/ The U.S. and France remained deadlocked
until February 11, 1955, when the terms -- but not the form -- of the
original agreement were finally accepted. The next day, General O'Daniel
assumed responsibility for training Vietnamese forces and the Training
Relations and Instruction Mission (TRIM) went into operation. 79/

19 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
