Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

rarily occupied zone," did not enjoy popular support, he said, and was
merely a tool.of the French. Pham Van Dong did not, however, propose
that France recognize "the sovereignty and independence of Vietnam
throughout the territory of Vietnam," a statement which amounted to a
rejection of the Franco-Vietnamese treaties approved on 28 April by
Laniel and Nguyen Trung Vinh. He instead offered an eight-point pro-
posal for a political settlement and a cease-fire:

1. Recognition by France of the sovereignty and independence
of Viet-Nam throughout the territory of Viet-Nam, and also
recognition of the sovereignty and independence of Khmer
and Pathet Lao. :

2. Conclusion of an agreement on the withdrawal of all foreign
troops from the territory of Viet-Nam, Khmer, and Pathet Lao
within the time limits to be agreed upon by the belligerents.
Pending the withdrawal of troops, the dislocation /sic/ of
French troops in Viet-Nam shall be agreed upon -- particular
attention being paid to limit to the minimum the number of
their dislocation points. Provision shall be made that the
French troops should not interfere in the affairs of local
administration in the areas of their dislocation.

3. Holding of free general elections in Viet-Nam, Khmer, and
Pathet Lao with a view to constituting a single government
in each country, convening of advisory conferences of the
representatives of the governments of both sides in Viet-Nam,
Khmer, and Pathet Lao -- in each of the States separately
and under conditions securing freedom of activity for patriotic
parties, groups, and social organizations; the preparation and
the holding of free general elections to establish a unified
government in each country. Interference from outside should
not be permitted. Local commissions will be set up to super-
vise the preparation for and the carrying out of the elections.
Prior to the establishment of unified governments in each of
the above-mentioned States, the governments of both sides will
specifically carry out the administrative functions in the
districts which will be under their administration, after the
settlement has been carried out, in accordance with the agree-
ment on the termination of hostilities.

4, The statements by the Delegation of the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam on the readiness of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam to examine the question of the entry of
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam into the French Union in
conformity with the principle of free will, and on the condi-
tions of this entry corresponding statements should be made
by the Governments of Khmer and of Pathet Lao.

C-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
