ee _ —
ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREL = Sensitive

faith of the peasants has been shaken by the disruption in
experienced leadership and the loss of physical security

in many areas, power vacuums have developed causing aaa
fusion among the people and a rising rate of rural disorders.

9 North Vietnamese support, always significant, has been
increasing. 92/

The major new action under consideration to help achieve CoE Cany:
important U.S. objectives in the face of this gloomy recording of recent
events was, as already noted, that of carrying the war to North Vietnam.
Secretary McNamara, whose memorandum to the President was published en
toto as NSAM 288, aid not foresee the need at that time for a further
major buildup of the advisory effort or for U.S. steps to take greater
control of the war. Again, the approach already selected was deemed
adequate. Only qualitative improvement was needed:

A. The military tools and concepts of the Gvn/us effort
are generally sound and adequate....Substantially more can be
done in the effective employment of military forces and in the
economic and civic action areas. These improvements may require
some selective increases in the U.S. presence, but it does not
appear likely that major equipment replacement and additions
in U.S. personnel are indicated under current policy.

B. The U.S. policy of reducing existing personnel where
South Vietnamese are in a position to assume the functions is
still sound. Its application will not lead to any major reduc-
tions in the near future, but adherence to this policy as such
has a sound effect in portraying to the U.S. and the world that
we continue to regard the war as a conflict the South Vietnamese
must win and take ultimate responsibility for. Substantial
reductions in the numbers of U.S. military training personnel
should be possible before the end of 1965. However, the U.S.
should continue to reiterate that it will provide a11 the
assistance and advice required to do the job regardless of
how long it takes. 93/

Two actions which were explicitly considered and rejected indicated that
the U.S. would still adhere to its oft-stated (and sometimes ignored)
position that the South Vietnamese must win their own war through their
own efforts:

Furnishing a U.S. Combat Unit to Secure the Saigon Area.

It is the universal judgment of our senior people in Saigon,
with which we concur, that this action would now have serious
adverse psychological consequences and should not be undertaken.

Wess Taking Over Command. It has been suggested that the

U.S. move from its present advisory role to a role that would

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
