Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

only the armed reconnaissence in Laos as part of the first phase. The
OSD representative also urged not yielding to pressures to participate
in a Geneva conference until after several military actions had been
taken against the pry. 65/ Of all the reservations stated above, only
the last (delaying Geneva participation) was reflected in subsequent
descriptions of Option C.

oi Even Option A was altered to some extent. The main emphasis for
A” continued to be the eurrently adopted policies. At some time prior
to 8 November (when the final analysis was drafted), interest was show
in an “extended A." ‘his version retained the policy of resisting nego-
tiations in hope that the situation would improve, but it incorporated
jow-level pressure actions akin to the early stages of "C." The type
and intensity of the actions “would vary in direct proportion to our
Success in convincing the world and our om public of the truth about
Hanoi's support, direction and control of the VC." It might begin with
armed reconnaissance in Laos, include greater naval activity along the
coast, and gradually phase into strikes against LOC targets in North
Vietnam. In terms of military actions alone, extended "A" resembled
closely the initial version of "Cc," However, it was conceded that even
an extended Option A did not offer a very promising means for moving
toward negotiations. 66/

Why did these changes take plece? The available documentary
materials do not make this entirely clear. One factor which may have
influenced the modifications in all three of the options was recognition
of the problem of conflicting signals that could result from reprisal
actions. If reprisals were designed to be forceful and punitive and
intended to match the seriousness of VC provocations, they might be so
strong as to interfere with the messages to Hanoi which it was originally
intended would be conveyed by the graduated pressures. Indeed, it was
pointed out that Operations orders already developed by CINCPAC for
retaliations in response to attacks on DE SOTO Patrols (should they be
resumed) were "of magnitude which would not be politically viable" except
under extremely serious provocations. 67/ Moreover, it was feared that
improperly orchestrated reprisals might create undue international
pressures for negotiations that could upset the negotiating strategy
appropriate for the selected option. 638/

Both "A" and "B" may have been altered as a result of changes
made in "C." The objections raised to the new "C" may have encouraged
Chairmen Bundy to include en extended "A" that was closer in the militery
sense to his and McNaughton's original concept of graduated pressures.
Moreoever, it had been pointed out that the same negotiating situetions
Seeh aS appropriate for "C" (to include discussions of Laos and/or
Cambodia as well as South Vietnam) eould also apply to eventual negotia-
tions arrived at through "A," 69/ Besides, with the stiffening of the
"C" negotiating formula, the distinctions between the respective bar-
gaining positions for "A" and "C" had become somewhat blurred. Option B's

"20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
