Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

20 regiments of North Vietnamese in South Viet-Nam. There are North
Vietnamese regiments in Iaos, opposed there by Laotian forces. There
are North Vietnamese-trained guerrillas now operating in the northeast
of Thailand. We hear reports of Chinese assistance going to the guer-
rillas in Burma. The Indonesians charge that the Chinese were deeply
involved in that attempted coup d'etat in 1965. We know the shooting
that occurred recently along the Sikkim border between Indian and
Chinese forces.

"So that these are--and we also have heard from Prince Sihanouk in
the last 2 or 3 weeks that he himself is.not very happy about what he
thinks the Chinese are doing in Cambodia. The Chinese are even quarreling
with Switzerland. They reach out to places like Kenya and Ceylon and
other places.

"It's not just their difficulties with the Soviet Union, India, the
United States, United Kingdom. They find it difficult to get along with
almost anyone, except their great and good friend Albania.

"So I don't think that we can pretend that the policies of China and
some of the actions being taken by China are a contribution toward peace
in Asia. At least our Asian friends don't think so."

inset

"Mr. Ruge: Mr. Secretary, if the aim of U.S. policy is now mainly
containment of China, how do you envision the future of Asia? Do you
expect to have all the other Asian countries armed to the point where
they're strong enough to resist China, or is that a permanent role for
the United States in the Pacific as the gendarmes for a couple of billions?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, I myself have not used that term 'contain-
ment of China.’ It is true that at the present time we have an alliance
with Korea, Japan, the Republic of China on Taiwan, the Philippines, Thai-
land, Australia, and New Zealand. Wow, does that system of alliances add
up to containment? That is something one can judge.

"Would the determination of India not to permit Chinese intrusions
across its long frontier be containment? That is to judge. My guess is
that none of the countries of free Asia want to see themselves overrun by
mainland China, and in the case of some of those countries we have an
alliance. Now, we have not ourselves undertaken to be the world's police-
man, for all purposes, all around the globe. But we do have some alliances
and those alliarces are very serious to us and unless we take them seri-
ously, my guess is that some very serious dangers will erupt not only in
Asia but in other places.”

x +. -*

"Secretary Rusk: Back in 1964, in August 1964, our Congress with
only two dissenting votes, declared that it was in the vital interest of

D-128
