Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This document reflected the Secretary of Defense's immediate con-
cern with trying to find maneuver battalions and troops within existing
service capabilities and trying to avoid approaching the personnel
"sound barrier" and that of having to call up reserves or to partially
mobilize units. As a check on this analysis, on 8 May Secretary McNamara
distributed the estimate to the services and asked their comments. On
12 May, General Johnson of the Army replied that the Army could probably
exceed the estimated Capability by about 6 maneuver battalions. He based
this new estimate upon the assumption that procurement of critical items
of equipment could be accelerated by mid-year 1967, that some withdrawal
of equipment from the Reserve Components and non-deploying STRAF units
would be authorized and that some new methods would be developed to
accelerate the Army's ability to sustain forces in short tour areas. He
did not elaborate upon this final assumption, one which was to prove
one of the Army's primary personnel problems, that of either extending
the length of short tours or changing basic policies about consecutive
tours to these areas.

The upshot of all of this concern about capabilities was a May 18
memorandum prepared for the Secretary of Defense by Alain Enthoven,
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis. In it, he analyzed
and synthesized the information presented on the additional deployment
capability of the services. Crucially it noted that the Army had the

‘capability of providing 84,000 more troops, some 24,000 greater than
the original estimate which had been given to McNamara earlier in the
month. It included 21 maneuver battalions instead of 16. But, again,
this estimate was based upon the assumptions that the deployment of
the 5th Mechanized Division, then NATO-committed, and the rest of the
101st Airborne Division would be approved for deployment to SEA; that
an as yet unidentified improved solution to the rotation base problem
could be found and that there would be more and faster procurement of
equipment, especially helicopters. End strength increases for the
Army at the end of FY 69 were estimated to be 177,000 compared with the
110 to 120,000 which had been previously calculated. The increase by
December 1967 was to be 77,000 and by June 1968, 118,000. ‘The latter
figure was about 70% of the strength required by December of 1968. 30/

The significance of the 18 May memorandum seems to be that it
said: within rather narrow limits the figure of 60 - 65,000 is the
Army's capability.to provide troops in the form of maneuver battalions
properly equipped, ready for deployment within the time frame - all
below the requirement to mobilize the reserves. It also indicated that
the Air Force, although strained and possibly drawing down units in
Europe and other STRAF directed missions could meet the deployment
schedules within both the "optimum" and the "minimum essential" range,
although it would be preferable in the view of Harold Brown to meet
only the minimum essential requirement and to leave the TFS's which

136 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
