Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

14. Get Australian/New Zealand agreement to take responsibility
for establishing regional forces training center. (Ask State to try.)

15. Integrated U.S/GVN psychological warfare operations erganiza-
tion. (USIA job, ~ DOD will help.)

16. Accelerate positioning of remaining sub-sector advisory teams.
(OK - ask Max his requirements. )

17. Provide cash contingency fund to each sub-sector advisory
group. (OK - ask Max for his plan.)

18. Establish procedure for sub-sector advisory groups to draw
on USOM food stuffs and building materials (OK - ask Max for his
plan.)

19. Initiate dredging projects at Danang; Qui Nhon and Wha Trang,
(OK - ask Max for his requirements. )

20. Provide 4 LSTs and 6 LSVs for logistic support along east-
west supply axis. (OK ~ ask Max for his requirements.)

21. Accelerate program for jet applicable airfield. (What is the
program? - John will follow.)

To the measures the Secretary added one of his own: "extend tours," It was
incorporated into later versions of the list.

In addition to the above the Johnson report suggested two alternative
deployments of a tailored division force to assist Vietnamese units in of-
fensive action in II Corps. One was to deploy U.S. combat units to’ assume
responsibility for security of the Bien Hoa~Tan Son Nhut air base complex,
Nha Trang, Qui Nhon and Pleiku, The second was to deploy U.S. combat units
to assume responsibility for defense of Kontum, Pleiku and Darlac provinces
in II Corps. On the first alternative the Secretary noted: "Johnson does
not recommend this;" he suggested that JCS should study, and "Max's and
Westy's views" toward the second alternative should be sought. 139/

On 8 March, when Johnson was in Vietnam, the first two Marine batta-
lions landed at Danang, Almost all of the intelligence reports during that
month indicated our programs in Vietnam were either stalemated or failing.
Not only was RVNAF strength considerably below the goals set and agreed
upon, it was in considerable danger of actually decreasing. The situation
on this score was indicated by the following table included in the March
MACV report. 140/

108 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
