Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

the other, the GVN condemmed what were termed "national movements, such

as ‘Patriotic Front,' 'United Front,’ or ‘Fatherland Front,' [which] were
in reality of communist inspiration...simpoly and solely directing communist
propaganda and subversive agencies in the zone controlled by the national
government.” It claimed that responsive to orders from Hanoi, these organi-
zations were conducting a systematic campaign of terror and subversion.
During the two and one half years from 1957 through July, 1959, 174 assassi-
nations involving 10 servicemen, 20 civil guards, 65 village officials and
59 civilians were reported by the GVN to the ICC. The White Paper concluded
on the note that:

"Contrary to their official declarations, the Viet-Minh
Communists have turned their back upon the interests of the Viet-
namese people.

"Is it a question of the reunification of the country?
They have conceived of it as a simple subordination to Red Im-
perialism. In North Vietnam, democratic liberties are scoffed
at, sacred human rights trampled under foot. How could the
Vietnamese people express their real will under this reign of
terror where liberty is nothing but a word?

"Desirous to realize the reunification of the country through
freedom and in freedom, the Government of the Republic of Viet-
nam has repeatedly, but in vain, summoned the Communists to
re-establish and respect the fundamental liberties to which
human beings are entitled. This appeal was made in order to
create a favorable atmosphere for really free general elections.

"Not only are the Viet-Minh Communists enemies of democracy
and freedom, but they continue to mobilize their forces to sabo-
tage peace in this part of the world.

"The unceasing reinforcement of the Communist armed forces,
the importation, in great numbers, of arms and munitions into
North Vietnam, secret arm and ammunition dumps left in the terri-
tory of the Republic of Viet-Nam, subversive manoeuvres carried
out by Communist cadres constitute tangible and irrefutable evi-
dence of their deliberately aggressive intentions."

9. Implications: ICC Impotence ~

In the meantime, the ICC tried to engage the Geneva Conference
machinery to provide a substitute for France in Vietnam, with no better suc-
cess than the DRV. Acting on an ICC report, the U.K. made representations
to the GVN in December, 1955, on behalf of the ICC, but received no reply
until April, 1956, in which the GVN promised to cooperate with the ICC,
but again declined to accept responsibility for the Geneva Settlement. In
May, 1956, the Co-chairmen asked the ICC to remain functioning beyond its
contemplated termination in July, 1956, despite the informality of its re-
lations with the GVN. The ICC agreed, on May 27, 1956, to "continue deal-
ing with the parties concerned on the basis of ‘status quo.'" 114/ "Status
quo" by that time involved the ICC directly with the U.S. aid program. For
example, in April, 1956, the GVN notified the ICC through the French that it
had accepted a U.S. proposal to augment the U.S. MAAG in May 1956, with a
350-member group to be called the Temporary Equipment Recovery Mission (TERM),
tasked to assist in the evacuation of U.S. military equipment and supplies left

30 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
