Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

General MacArchurto_decide just how nineh and where the Freneh.
military con(ribution could be hest utilized. The Minister mentioned
that there were two Yrench divisions ready for immediate transporta--
tion tothe Far Iasi. In reply to my inquiry as to whether there ave
Senevnlese troops among them, he admitted that this was probably so,
aithough there were also substantial ntumbers of white French. Te
made it clear that the Frenel) divisions could be utilized anywhere
in the Far Tsast, and there was no intention of limiting their con-.
tribution to attacking the enemy in Indochina. I reiterated that
this matter wonld be placed before our suilitary_anthorities imme-
dintely.

In as mich. 4s the Acting Secretary of State agreed that the matter
would be placed before military authorities immediately, it 1s recom-
mended that the foregoing be brought..o the attention of the Joint
Chiefs of Stall at the earliest possible moment. In this connection,
the following suggestions which ire believed to be in harnony with
the expressed views of the Joint Chiefs of Sinff ave put forwird:

(a) While avoiding so far as practicable unnecessary or long-term
commitments with regard to the amount or character of any assistance
which the United States may give to French resistance forces in Indo-
china, this Government should continue te atford such assistance as
does not interfere with the requirements of other planned operations.
Owing to the need for concentrating all our resources in the Pacific
on operations already planned, large-scale military operations aimed
directly at the liberation of Indochina cannot, however, be contem-
plated at this time. American troops should not be used in Tido-
china except in American military operations against the Japanese.

(2) French oifers of military and naval assistance in the Pacific
should be considered on their military merits as bearing on the ebjee-
{ive of defeating Japan as in the case of British and Dutch proposals.
There would be no objection to Turnishine of assistance to any French
qnilitary or naval forces so approved, regardless of the theatre of op-
erations from which the assistance may be sent, provided such assist-
ance does not involve a diversion of resowrees which the Combined or
Joint Chiefs of Staif consider are needed elsewhere.

at LS AT

5 ae HH. Preearan Marrincws

23
