Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) seeking one major battle which promised significant
political gains.

(4) expanding current efforts in Laos. 21/
Based on this analysis, Communist intentions were assessed as follows:

The Communists probably intend to maintain widespread mili-
tary pressures in Vietnam for at least the next several months.
A special effort will be made to harass urban areas and keep
them under threat. They will probably calculate that the
US/GVN will be forced to defend the towns and the countryside
will be left more vulnerable to Communist domination. At
some time, new Communist attacks will probably be launched
to seize and hold certain cities and towns. Where condi-
tions appear favorable they will engage US forces, seeking
some significant local success which would have a major
political return. The total result of their campaign, they
hope, will be to so strain the resources of the US and the
GVN/ARVN, that the Saigon government will lose control of
much of the country and the US will have little choice but
to settle the war on Communist terms. 22/

The third CIA paper, submitted on 1 March 1968, attempted to answer
specific questions posed by the Secretary of Defense in his initial meeting
with his senior working group on 29 February. Pertinent questions and the
CIA assessment are listed below:

Q@. What is the likely course of events in South Vietnam
over the next 10 months, assuming no change in U.S. policy
or force levels?

A. In the assumed circumstances a total military victory
by the Allies or the Communists is highly unlikely in the next
10 months. It is manifestly impossible for the Communists to
drive U.S. forces out of the country. It is equally out of
the question for US/GVN forces to clear South Vietnam of
Communist forces. It is possible, however, that the over-
all situation in this period will take a decisive turn.

We think it unlikely that this turn could be in the
us/GVN favor...-We see no evidence yet that the GVN/ARVN
will be inspired to seize the initiative, go over to the
attack, exploit the Communist vulnerabilities, and quickly
regain the rural areas. We doubt they have the will and
capability to make the effort.

Far more likely is an erosion of the ARVN's morale
and effectiveness. We do not believe that the GVN will
collapse, or that the ARVN will totally disintegrate. But

19 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
