Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

diplomacy and a potential disaster for U.S. security interests in the

Far East. The Operations Coordinating Board (OCB) stated that the Final
Declaration of the Conference "completed a major forward stride of
Communism which may lead to the loss of Southeast Asia. It, therefore,
recorded a drastic defeat of key policies in NSC 5405 and a serious loss
for the free world, the psychological and political effects of which will
be felt throughout the Far East and around the globe." 6/ In a séparate
report, the NSC was somewhat more specific concerning the extent of the
damage: the Communists acquired “an advance salient" in Vietnam for use
in military and non-military ways; the U.S. lost prestige as a leader in
Asia capable of stemming Communist expansion; the Communist peace line
gained at America's expense; Communist military and political prestige
was enhanced as the result of their ability to exploit unstable situations
in Southeast Asian countries without resort to armed attack. v/

ec. U.S.-U.K. Seven-Point Program is Mostly Accomplished
The provisions of the Accords, however, should have furnished
the U.S. grounds for some satisfaction. Comparing the U.S.-U.K. seven-
point memorandum of 29 June with the final settlement nearly one month
later, the Conference had very nearly satisfied the minimum U.S. objectives
-- despite Washington's apprehension over faltering British or French sup-
port.

(1) The integrity and independence of Laos and Cambodia
were preserved, and Viet Minh forces were, in the main, withdrawn from
those two countries.

(2) Southern Vietnam was retained (although without an en-
clave in the North), and the partition line was drawn somewhat south of
Dong Hoi.

(3) Laos, Cambodia, and "retained" Vietnam were not prevented
from forming "non-Communist regimes” (in the case of Vietnam, within the
two-year pre-election period); nor were they expressly forbidden "to main-
tain adequate forces for internal security." Vietnam's right to import
arms and other war materiel was, however, restricted to piece-by-piece
replacement, and a ceiling was fixed on foreign military personnel at the
number in the country at the War's close.

(4-5) Recalling Dulles' interpretation of 7 July that elec-
tions should "be only held as long after cease-fire agreement as possible
and in conditions free from intimidation to give democratic elements best
chance," 8/ the Accords did not stipulate "political provisions which
would risk loss of the retained area to Communist control... /or/ exclude
the possibility of the ultimate reunification of Vietnam by peaceful
means." Although both Dulles and Mendes-France preferred that no date
be set for the elections, the compromise two-year hiatus gave the Americans,
the French, and the South Vietnamese a significant breathing spell. The

D-15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
