Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ligh Tein Zab VERSIONS OF THE "ASIAN TITO" HYPOTHESIS

Following are extracts from authors who have advanced arguments
that Ho Chi Minh, with the stimulus of U.S. support, might have adopted
a non-aligned or, at least, counter-Peking foreign policy. The corol-
lary contention is that Ho. was forced to accept dependency on Peay and
Peking by American opposition or indifference.

Generalizations

(1) None argue that Ho was not a communist or that a communist
Vietnam would not have eventuated under Ho's leadership.

(2) Rather, they point out that Ho demonstrated willingness to
subordinate communist goals and forms to attaining nationalist objectives. ,
They accept a communist Vietnam, indeed even favor it, on the grounds that
only a national communism led by Ho would be sufficiently strong to main-
tain independence of the Chinese.

(3) They stress the historic Vietnamese aut aperhy to the Chinese >
as a pillar of Viet nationalism, and point to Ho's attempts in 1945 and
1946 to obtain Western backing.

(4) No really close parallel can be drawn between the origins of
Ho Chi Minh and Tito, since unlike Tito, Ho fought his way to power in
virtual isolation, without the intervention of an external communist
power. However, it can be accurately said that U.S. policies in Europe
have generally been directed at widening the split between Tito and
Moscow, while in Asia, our policy has tended to force Ho into closer
relations with Peking and Hanoi.

(5) The "Tito" issue raises pointedly the question of whether U.S.
strategy in Asia is anti-communist or anti-Chinese. Since to block
Soviet expansion in Europe the U.S. set aside its repugnance to Tito's
communism, it is argued, the U.S. should similarly renounce its opposition
to Ho to serve its larger strategic interests in Asia.

Synopses
Page
Isaacs, Harold; No Peace for Asia. ae
In 1947, Ho was motivated by a deep nationalism aimed
principally at independence, and was sorely disenchanted
with communism, having received little or no help or
encouragement from foreign parties. Literally the U.S.
was the only power to whom Viet nationalists could turn
with hope, but even then the U.S. actions in support of
France stood in contrast to its principled pronouncements
in favor of self-determination and against colonialism...... C-11

c-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
