Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

THE U.S. ViIlW: 1962 - 1963

Six months after Diem fell. the U.S. would conclude that these
advisory levels were inadequate, but during the Diem area the predom-
inant official attitude was one of sustained optimism. The war was
being won, it was maintained, by adherence to the newly articulated
theory of counterinsurgency. The U.S, even made tentative plans to
begin reducing the American presence in Vietnam. By the time the U.S.
began seriously to consider attempts to exercise leverage against the
Ngo family's conduct of affairs Diem's regime was already well down the
road to its eventual overthrow.

The Strategic Hamlet Progrem was the principal operational vehicle
by which the recently articulated theory of counterinsurgency was to be
translated into reality. In general, the plan was to begin by providing
to the rural populace a degree of security sufficient to serve as & pre-
condition for further military and political action. In the military
field the peasants' increased security was to be the wedge by which more
effective intelligence gathering could take place. The rural population
could not be expected to inform on VC whereabouts, it was reasoned, uniess
it was safe from retaliatory acts by the insurgents. Political action to
promote identification between the central government and the rural popu-
lation was also to take place in the shadow of these improved physical
security arrangements. Security was viewed, then, as the precondition to
the military and political gains at which General Taylor's mission had
aimed its recommendations.

The evolution and demise of the Strategic Hamlet Program is examined
in another volume of the present series.” It is pertinent to the present
study, however, to note the points of stress in this program as they
pertained to RVNA¥. Most of the new American advisory effort was directed
to improving ARVN, in its equipment and mobility capability and in its
aggressiveness. The central U.S, expectation was that a greater capability
to move quickly could be combined with improved leadership so that ARVN
could, on one hand, be capable of responding quickly and in force wherever
and whenever the VC chose to concentrate for local superiority and, on
the other, be made aggressive enough to beat the Viet Cong at their om
game -~ to "take the night away" from the VC and to use guerrilla techniques
to hunt down and defeat the insurgents in their own bailiwicks.

The realization of these expectations was dependent upon several
developments, each of which had to occur if ARVN was to become capable
of turning the tide in the insurgent. bsttle. First, the CG and SDC had
to become sufficiently effective to permit ARVN to be used as a mobile
reserve for protective purposes rather than as part of the static pro-
tection force. Second, ARVN had to be given adequate capability to move
quickly, whether in reacting or in seizing the initiative. Finally, both
ARVN's leaders and the political leaders to whom they were responsible
had to accept and put into operational practice @ spirit of aggressiveness
to take advantage of the existing static defenses and the newly-gained
mobility.

ee * Volume IV.B. Evolution of the War: The Strategic Hamlet Program, 1961-
A* 1963 (7S). é Se

33 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
