Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the internal development was in any detail, but I do know that the
Annamite Communists I met were men bitten deeply with the bitterness
of having been abandoned by their ideological comrades overseas.

They had consequently taken refuge in a pure and simple nationalism.
Ho Chi Minh was making no idle phrase when he said: "My party is my
country." They were oppressed, in common with all the non-Communist
Annamite nationalist leaders, by a fearful sense of loneliness. There
seemed to be support for them against the French nowhere, none from
the Chinese they could count on, none that could be anticipated from
the Russians, none from the French Communists, who did gain enormous
strength in those October elections without effecting any noticeable
change in Indochinese affairs. What then of the United States?

Annamite nationalists spoke of the United States as men speak of
a hope they know is forlorn but to which they desperately cling all
the same. Could all the fine phrases of the Atlantic Charter, of the
United Nations pact, of President Roosevelt and his successor, really
have meant nothing at all? Nothing? All right, let us make allowances
for expediency, for big-power politics, for all the shabby realities.
Would not the United States still find it wiser for the sake of its
position in the Far East to win support among the people rather than
to cling to the rotten imperial system of the past? It seemed not.
For the only indication the Annamites had of America's role in their
struggle came in the form of lend-lease weapons and equipment being
used against them by the French and British, and the stunning announce-
ment of an American deal with France for the purchase of $160,000,000
worth of vehicles and miscellaneous industrial equipment for the French
in Indochina. To the Annamites this looked like American underwriting
of the French reconquest. The Americans were democrats in words but
no help in fact, just as the Russians were communists in words but
no help in fact. "We apparently stand quite alone," said Ho Chi-minh
simply. "We shall have to depend on ourselves."

c-13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
