Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

violation of the accords by the other side. We raised our military
personnel from the levels provided in the Geneva accords to 10,000
men in 1962 and to roughly 25,000 men at the end of 196+. These men
acted as-advisers and assisted the Government of South Viet-Nam in its
logistics. They did not operate as combat ground units.”

*¥ * *

"There is in addition the strategic stake, for, without accepting
the pat simplicities of 'domino' theories, none of us could doubt that
the preservation of the independence of Thailand, of Malaysia, of
Singapore, of Burma, and beyond them in the long run of India, the
Philippines, and Australia would become infinitely more difficult if
this Communist venture were to succeed in South Viet-Nam. It is a
Hanoi venture, but its success would feed the fires of the clearly
expansionist thrust of Communist Chinese policy. That expansion must
be contained so that over time there may emerge the latent moderate
and constructive elements within Communist China.

,

"There is the world stake in defeating efforts to change the inter-
national framework by force, whether the attempt be, as in this case,
by a Communist nation across a line that separates it from a non-Communist
country or across a line that divides countries where communism is not a
part of the issue. These are the stakes as we see them.- We shall con-
tinue to do what is necessary to insure that South Viet-Nam will be able
to stand on its own feet and determine its own future."

50. Address by Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg, U.S. Representative to
the United Nations, at the University of California, Berkeley,

California on March 25, 1966, "The Quest for Peace”; Department
of State Bulletin, April 18, 1966, p. 608.
x * &

"Such principles are all very well. But between the idea and the
reality falls the shadow--the shadow of Viet-Nam. Can this war be fitted
into any wider concept of the search for better methods of peacekeeping?
I think it can. No thinking American would support it if it could not.

Let me begin by saying what this war is not.

"It is not emphatically a war to establish an American ‘imperialism’
or an American ‘sphere of influence’ in Asia. What exclusive interests
have we there? Investment? trade? settlement? None. ;

"Tt is not a war to threaten or frustrate the legitimete interests
of the Chinese people--though it seeks to discourage violence and aggres-
sion and play some part in persuading them that the imperialist world,
once known to the Central Kingdom, is dead and will not be resurrected.

“D-T7
