Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

as defined by the Communists, would mean the breakdown of peace itself.

"South Viet-Nam's Right of Self-Defense

"Viet-Nam presents a clear current case of the lawful versus the
unlawful use of force, I would agree with General Giap [Yo Nguyen Giap,
North Vietnamese Commander in Chief/ and other Communists that it is a
test case for ‘wars of national liberation.' We intend to meet that test.

"Were the insurgency in South Viet-Nam truly indigenous and self-
sustained, international law would not be involved. But the fact is that
it receives vital external support--in organization and direction, in
training, in men, in weapons and other supplies. That external support
is unlawful for a double reason. First, it contravenes general inter-
national law, which the United Nations Charter here expresses. Second,
it contravenes particular international law: the 195) Geneva accords
on Viet-Nam and the 1962 Geneva agreements on Laos. :

"In resisting the aggression against it, the Republic of Viet-Nam
is exercising its right of self-defense. It called upon us and other
states for assistance. And in the exercise of the right of collective
self-defense under the United Nations Charter, we and other nations are
providing such assistance.

"The American policy of assisting South Viet-Nam to maintain its
freedom was inaugurated under President Eisenhower and continued under
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. Our assistance has been increased
because the aggression from the North has been augmented. Our assistance
now encompasses the bombing of North Viet-Nem. The bombing is designed
to interdict, as far as possible, and to inhibit, as far as may be neces-
sary, continued aggression against the Republic of Viet-Nam.

"When that aggression ceases, collective measures in defense against
it will cease. As President Johnson has declared:

'...if that aggression is stopped, the people and Government
of South Viet-Nam will be free to settle their own future, and the need
for supporting American military action there will end.'

"The fact that the demarcation line between North and South Viet-
Nam was intended to be temporary does not make the assault on South
Viet-Nam any less of an aggression. The demarcation lines between North
and South Korea and between East and West Germany are temporary. But
thet did not make the North Korean invasion of South Korea a permissible
use of force.

"Tet's not forget the salient features of the 1962 agreements on
Iaos. lIaos was to be independent and neutral. All foreign troops, regu-
lar or irregular, and other military personnel were to be withdrawn within
“75 days, except a limited number of French instructors as requested by

D-37
