Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

draft NSAM. The language of the Pacific commanders had been less
cautious, and their message unmistakable -- we were militarily in
South Vietnam to convincingly defeat the VC/NVA, that the war could
be long and difficult, and the field commander should be granted the
operational flexibility and resources he needed to do the job as he
perceived it. To insure success, CINCPAC cabled, it was imperative
that we get our guidance and objectives unequivocally and clearly laid
down:

"A, The hard fact is that, even if there were no war
in progress in Vietnam, many of the objectives listed in the
civil and political fields could not be realized in the 1967
time frame. The draft paper does not assess the adequacy of
resources to carry out the Program B. The objectives listed
for accomplishment are so all inclusive that publication in
a national policy paper, one likely to receive wide publicity,
is to invite future criticism if many objectives are not
realized.

"C. It could be interpreted that all aims and programs
are to be pursued equally and simpltanecously. It should be
recognized that forces and other resources currently approved
for South Vietnam do not provide the capabilities to accom-
plish all these programs in 1967.

"h, There is a danger that the detailed and specific guidance
in the paper would reduce the flexibility required by the
operational commander in utilizing assets available to him

to best accomplish his mission. The sitvation in Vietnam is
fluid and dynamic requiring that decisions in use of forces and
other assets be made in accordance with the dictates of the
situation. It is therefore recommended that NSAM be restricted
to a clear, concise statement of national policy for Vietnam,
accompanied by a broad statement of integrated military, civil
and political objectives to be pursued in 1967 under that policy.

"5S, The long range implications of the proposed actions for
1967 in Vietnam are of such magnitude that it is imperative
that they be in consonance with our national objectives for
South Vietnam. It is recommended that the NSAM stipulate in
the preamble that ‘actions taken to terminate hostilities
shall be in accordance with our national objective to assist
the government of Vietnam and its armed forces to defeat
externally directed and supported communist subversion and
aggression, and attain an independent non-communist society
in South Vietnam functioning in a secure environment." 34/

We see that the problem of understanding and interpreting the country's
objectives in South Vietnam was not limited to the JCS-Secretary of

fie! TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
