dar

Os

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

President, in his April 16, 1953, address, and I myself, in an address
of September 2, 1953, made clear that the United States would take a
grave view of any future overt military Chinese Communist aggression in
relation to the Pacific or Southeast Asia area. Such an aggression
would threaten island and peninsular positions which secure the United
States and its allies.

"Tf such overt military aggression occurred, that would be a
deliberate threat to the United States itself. The United States would
of course invoke the processes of the United Nations and consult with
its allies. But we could not escape ultimate responsibility for deci-
sions closely touching our own security and self-defense.

"There are some, particularly abroad, who seem to assume that the
attitude of the United States flows from a desire for a general war
with Communist China. That is clearly false. If we had wanted such a
war, it could easily have been based on the presence of Chinese aggres-
sors in Korea. But last July, in spite of difficulties which at times
seemed insuperable, we concluded a Korean armistice with Communist
China. How could it be more surely demonstrated that we have both the
will to make peace and the competence to make peace?

"Your Government wants peace, and the American people want peace.
But should there ever be openly launched an attack that the American
people would clearly recognize as a threat to our own security, then
the right of self-preservation would demand that we -- regardless of any
other country -- meet the issue squarely.

"Tt is the task of statesmanship to seek peace and deter war, while
at the same time preserving vital national interests: Under present
conditions that dual result is not easy to achieve, and it cannot be
achieved at all unless your Government is backed by a people who are
willing, if need be, to sacrifice to preserve their vital interests.

"At the Geneva Conference I said: "Peace is always easy to achieve
-- by surrender.’ Your Government does not propose to buy peace at that
price. We do not believe that the American people want peace at that
price. So long as that is our national will, and so long as that will
be backed by a capacity for effective action, our Nation can face the
future with that calm confidence which is the due of those who, in a
troubled world, hold fast that which is good.”

1h. President Eisenhower's News Conference, July 21, 1954, Public
Papers of tre Presidents, 1954, Pp. éke:
* * *

" Reading] I am glad, of course, that agreement has been reached
at Geneva to stop the bloodshed in Indochina. The United States has not .-

*

B-20
