64.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Presidential approval. Following on the spot discussions

with US and Vietnamese officials, he will forward to the Director
of the Tas’: Force specific recommendations for action in support
of the attached program.

This appears to have been the high point of Lansdale's role in Vietnam
policy. Lansdale by this time had already sent (with Gilpatric's approval)
messages requesting various people to meet him in Saigon, May 5. This is
from a memorandum he sent to Richard Bissell, then still a Deputy Director
of the CIA, requesting the services of one of his colleagues from the
1955-1956 experience in Vietnan:

I realize Redick is committed to an important job in Laos
and that this is 9, difficult time in that trouble spot. I do
feel, however, that we may yet save Vietnam and that our best
effort should be put into it.

Redick, in my opinion, is now so much a part of the vninhib-
ited communications between President Diem and myself that it goes
far beyond the question of having an interpreter. His particular
facility for appreciating my meaning in words and the thoughts
of Diem in return is practically indispensable to me in the role
I am assigned in seeking President Kennedy's goal for Vietnam.

But none of this was to be. Present files contain a thermofax of
McNemaira's copy of the memorandum Gilpatric sent to the President. In
McNemara's handwriting the words (Lansdale) "will proceed to Vietnam in-
mediately" are changed to "will proceed to Vietnam when requested by the
Anbassador." As we will see below, when the Task Force Report wes re-
drafted the next week, Lansdale's key role disappears entirely, at the
request of the State Department, but presumably with the concurrence of
the White House.

IV. KENNEDY'S APRIL 29 DECISIONS

Although our record is not clear, it appears that the cover memorandum
was sent to the President as Gilpatric had signed it, and that McNemara's
correction reflected a decision made after the paper went to the President,
rather than a change in the language of the memo. In any event, at a
meeting on April 29, President Kennedy approved only the quite limited mili-
tary proposals of the draft report it transmitted. Decisions were deferred
on the balance of the paper, which now included an annex issued April 28 on
much more substantial additional military aid believed required by the
situation in Laos. The military measures approved during this first go-
around were:

(1) Inerease the MAAG as necessary to insure the effective im-
plementation of the military portion of the program including
the training of a 20,000-man addition to the present GVN armed

: 2
: 9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
