Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

E. DECISION

1. The McNaughton Draft Presidential Memorandum

On 19 May, the memorandum on which McNaughton had been working
was floated. It was a comprehensive document drawing upon the argu-
ments developed in the Office of Systems Analysis as well as recent
CIA studies and views both from the State Department and the White
House on the bombing. The preamble to the basic document noted that
it was written at a time when there appeared to be no attractive course
of action. McNaughton stated that he believed that Hanoi had decided
not to negotiate until the American electorate had been heard from in
November of 1968. His appraisal of the current situation dwelled on
the unpopular nature of the Vietnam war in the country. In his eyes
it was becoming:

--+-increasingly unpopular as it escalates -- causing
more American casualties, more fear of its growing into a
wider war, more privation of the domestic sector, and more
distress at the amount of suffering being visited on the
non-combatants in Vietnam, South and North. Most Americans
do not know how we got where we are, and most, without
knowing why, but taking advantage of hindsight, are con-
vinced that somehow we should not have gotten this deeply
in. All want the war ended and expect their President to
end it. Successfully, or else.

This state of mind in the US generates impatience in
the political structure of the United States. It unfor-
tunately also generates patience in Hanoi. (It is commonly
supposed that Hanoi will not give anything away pending the
trial of the US elections in November 1968.) ay

There is sufficient evidence that McNaughton's feelings about the
war, and especially the increasing opposition to force increases in South
Vietnam, ran much deeper than even the cogent arguments he had been making
in the draft memorandum. In a memo for the Secretary of Defense written
on 6 May after McNaughton had examined an earlier 5 May “Rough Draft,"
he described his apprehensions about the ground force strategy which
he described as a "trap which had ensnared us," and which if unchecked
might lead us to almost an irreversible ground force escalation for
the next undetermined number of years. He wrote:

I am afraid there is the fatal flaw in the strategy
in the draft. It is that the strategy falls into the trap

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
