Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ri
Aa attsalen’ Agen (=

rat As ICN a
TOP SECRET - Sensitive —

oes
eT)

government with Khanh in a leading role, ideally as chief
executive unless some strong civilian shows up who is not
now apparent. At least Khanh should remain as leader of
Army with co-equal position to civilians in & government,
whose mandate will run for at least 18 months...We believe
it should be made clear that U.S. does not repeat not
support Minh as powerful chief executive.

"This is consensus here and we would much appreicate
your comment." 41

Once again the policy was to Limit change and to limit civilian influence.
Taylor replied:

"Ihe views which you and Bob McNemara express...are very
much the same conclusions we have reached and acted upon
here." ha/

Minh expected to be the new Chief of State and to name the Prime
Minister. Taylor talked to him about the selection problem, saying that
he wished to be consulted. Minh asked Taylor's view of Saigon's Mayor
Huong and of Minister of the Interior Vien. Taylor diplomatically gave
his very high opinion of Vien. 43/ State urged Teylor to use his influ-
ence stay while he could still influence the shape of the new govern-
ment.

The High National Council finished on schedule on October 27,
and surprised the Embassy by electing its chairman, Phan Khac Suu. an
elderly and respected politician, to be the new Chief of State. Religious
group leaders pressured the HNC into this decision at the Jast minute.
Taylor had hoped and expected Minh would be elected; although the action.
met Khanh's promise in August that the military would get out of politics.
Khanh and his cabinet resigned and went into caretaker status. The HNC
stayed on as the legislative body. Taylor tried to make the best of it,
but protested to Sun about the failure of the HNC to consult him about
Suu's election; Suu responded by discussing the composition of the new
cabinet with him, naming Huong as Prime Minister. Taylor also gave Suu
the usual polite lecture about the need for strong government. State
went along reluctantly with the new government; Khanh and the Young Turks
also went along.

7. A Quiet November, 1964

At the end of October, the VC staged a mortar attack on the Bien
Hoa air base, destroying several U.S, aircraft and killing four Americans.
Taylor urged @ reprisal bombing like the one in August following the Tonkin
Gulf incidents, but Washington declined to approve. Huong told Taylor
he hoped the U.S. would respond, in a meeting to consult on Huong's pend-
ing cabinet appointments, but the issue was already decided and Taylor
had to discourage the idea. 46/

h8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
