Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive -

*

What were US expectations with respect to this initiative, and how
did it relate to the new policy of pressures against the DRV? An excel-
lent indication of State Department thinking on these matters at that
moment is contained in an unfinished draft memorandum dated February 18,
prepared by William P. Bundy and entitled “Where Are We Heading?" Because
it is addressed to the relevant issues of that moment and surveys the
political-diplomatic scene, it is reproduced here in full:

This memorandum examines possible developments and prob-
lems if the US pursues the following policy with respect to
South Viet-Nen;

a. Intensified pacification within South Vietnam. To
meet the security problem, this might include a significant
increase in present US force strength.

“b. A program of measured, limited, and spaced air attacks,
jointly with the GVN, against the infiltration complex in the
DRV. Such attacks would take place at the rate of about one &
week, unless spectacular Viet Cong action dictated an immediate
response out of sequence. The normal pattern of such attacks
would comprise one GVN end one US strike on each occasion,
confined to targets south of the 19th parallel, with variations
in severity depending on the tempo of VC action, but with a slow
upward trend in severity as the weeks went by.

‘¢. That the US itself would take no initiative for talks,
but would agree to cooperate in consultations -- not a confer-
ence -- undertaken by the UK and USSR as Co-Chairmen of the
Geneva Conferences. As an opening move, the British would
request an expression of our views, and we would use this oc-
casion to spell out our position fully, including our purposes
and what we regard as essential to the restoration of peace.
We would further present our case against the DRV in the form
of a long written document to be sent to the President of the
United Nations Security Council and to-be circulated to members
of the UN.

% * * x
‘1. Communist responses.

a. Hanoi would almost certainly not feel itself under
pressure at any early point to enter into fruitful negotiations
or to call off.its activity in any way. They would denounce the
continued air attecks and seek to whip up maximum world opposi-
tion to them. Within South Viet-Nam, they might avoid spectacular
actions, but would certainly continue a substantiel pattern of
activity along past lines, probably with emphasis on the kind of

55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
