Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"continue to assist free nations of this area who are struggling for
their survival against armed minorities directed, supplied, and sup-
ported from without,' just as we would assist those under attack by
naked aggression. President Kennedy referred to our obligations under
SEATO on a number of occasions, including his last public utterance,
and President Johnson has done so frequently.

"In April 1964 the SEATO Council of Ministers declared that the
attack on the Republic of Viet-Nam was an aggression ‘directed, sup-
plied and supported by the Communist regime in North Wistuam, in
flagrant violation of the Geneva accords of 1954 and 1962.' They
declared also that the defeat of that ‘Communist campaign is essential’
and that the members of SEATO should remain prepared to take further
steps in fulfillment of their obligations under the treaty. Only France
did not join in these declarations.

~

"A few days later, in this city, President Johnson said that:

'The statement. of the SEATO allies that Communist defeat is
‘essential’ is a reality. To fail to respond...would reflect on our
honor as a nation, would undermine worldwide confidence in our courage,
would convince every nation in South Asia that it must now bow to
Communist terms to survive....So let no one doubt (he said) that we are
in this battle as long as South Viet-Nam wants our support and needs
our assistance to protect its freedom.'

"The resolution of August 1964, which the House of Representatives
adopted unanimously and the Senate with only two negative votes, said
that "the United States regards as vital to its national interest and
to world peace the maintenance of international peace and security in
Southeast Asia.’ It also said that ‘the United States is, therefore;
prepared, as the President determines, to take all necessary steps,
including the use of armed force, to assist any member or protocol state
of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in
defense of its freedom.'

"FULFILLING OUR COMMITMENT

"Now the third aspect is the means of fulfilling our commitment.
These have changed with the nature of the problem and as the dimensions
of the aggression have grown. The decision to commit American forces
into combat was made by the President with understandable sobriety and
reluctance and only because it became necessary to cope with the escala-
tion of the aggression by the other side.

"T have no doubt that a lerge majority of the governments of the
free world are sympathetic to our efforts in Southeast Asia and would be
deeply concerned were they to fail...."

eS

D-83 -
