Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PART TWO

THE ADVISORY BUILD-UP, 1961-1967

A. The Kennedy Programs (1961-1963)

THE CONTEXT OF DECTSIONS

By the end of 1961, the U.S. had decided to double its military
advisory effort in South Vietnam by establishing advisory teams at the
province (sector) level and within ARVN's battalions. The decision to
take this step was one of a large number of decisions designed to "buy
time" in RVN so that GVN could mobilize its resources and swing over from
the defensive to the offensive. All of the major participants appear
to have agreed that the situation in RVN was bad and becoming worse, that
additional U.S. actions were needed if South Vietnam was to be saved, and
that the issue was of sufficient importance in terms of U.S. interest to
Justify doing whatever was necessary. The question was what should be
done, not if anything could be done. Defeat was too catastrophic an outcome
to bear examination. Moreover, decisions ebout Vietnam in 1961 were, until
the very end of the year, made in the shadow of more pressing emergencies--
the Berlin crisis and events in Taos.” It is most important to recognize
this relative lack of centrality if one is to understand the apparently
incomplete process by which decisions on Vietnam were reached. Moreover,
the dimensions of the Vietnamese problem were clear and agreed to by all,
Elusive solutions had to be sought in the interstices, as it were, of the
policymakers' limited tine.

It is difficult to imagine any responsible individual or group, for
instance, taking exception to the litany of problems ticked off by General
feylor in his report following his important October 1961 mission to South
Vietnam: :

lack of intelligence

ARVN's defensive posture

Poor command and control

Poor GVN administrative procedures
Lack of initiative

GVN failure to communicate with and mobilize its people,
particularly the intellecturals and the young people. 30/

* This period is described more fully in a volume in the present series,

IV.B.1., Evolution of the War: The Kennedy Programs, 1961.

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
