Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

much ado about nothing but simply much ado...It was all
spectacular and diverting but so far as we can see the
problem of the war is where it was before the burst of
activity began...It is probably worthwhile to have a
reiteration of the social and economic measures needed in
South Vietmam...It is essential to underscore the political
nature of the war, along with the continuing military opera-
tions. But these matters were generally understood before
the Honolulu meetings. Perhaps events to come will make the
purpose of the meeting clearer."

EDITORIAL: The New York Post, February 9:

"The Hawaii meetings were advertised as the beginning
of a vast new movement of economic and social reform in
Vietnam, President Johnson, we were told, went to Honolulu
to launch the new approach with maximum drama.

"Instead, the session inadvertently underscored the
lack of interest of the junta in Saigon in anything but
- military conquest of the Viet Cong, to be carried out by
stepped up U.S. armed efforts..."

NEWS STORY: AP, February 10 (from Honolulu):

"Vice President Humphrey left for Saigon today with
South Vietnam's top leaders to spur action on programs
attacking hunger, disease, and ignorance in that war-torn
country..."

NEWS ANALYSIS: Charles Mohr, The New York Times, February 10
(from Saigon):

"In the atmosphere of Honolulu, there was much emphasis
on form, so mich that in some ways it may have obscured
substance. The Americans appeared so delighted with
Marshal Ky's ‘style’ -- with his showing as a politically
sealable young man with the right instincts rather than as
@ young warlord -- that there seemed to be almost no
emphasis on the important differences between the Govern-
ments...What Marshal Ky told President Johnson was something
he had often said before: South Vietnamese society is still
riddled with social injustices and political weaknesses;
there is not one political party worthy of the name...The
South Vietnamese leaders believe that they could not survive
a ‘peaceful settlement’ that left the VC political structure
in place, even if the VC guerrilla units were disbanded.
Therefore, the South Vietnamese feel that 'rural pacifica-
tion,' of which mich was said at Honolulu, is necessary not

te) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
