Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

circumstances, e.g. isolation from sanctuaries, the Philippine and Malayan
insurgencies each took the better part of a dozen years to bring to an
end.

Second, there was an unrealistic contradiction within the CPSVN it-
self. As directed by Secretary McNamara, U.S. MAP was to decrease as ~
RVNAF increased. In practical terms, MAP costs should have been programmed
to increase as the South Vietnamese Army increased, and as they themselves
began to bear most of the burden. The desire to keep MAP costs down after
FY 65 could, at best, be perceived as a budgeting or program gimmick not a
serious policy.

Three, the political situation in South Vietnam itself should have
prompted more realistic contingency plans against failure of the Vietnamese,
in order to give the U.S. some options other than what appeared as precipi-
tous withdrawal. The intelligence and reporting systems for Vietnam during
this period must bear a principal responsibility for the unfounded opti-
mism of U.S. policy. Except for some very tenuous caveats, the picture
was repeatedly painted in terms of progress and success.

In the July 1962 Honolulu Conference the tone was set. Secretary
McNamara asked COMUSMACV how long it would take before the VC could be ex-
pected to be eliminated as a significant force. In reply, COMUSMACV esti-
mated about one year from the time RVNAF and other forces became fully
operational and began to press the VC in all areas. Mr. McNamara was told
and believed that there had been "tremendous progress" in the past six
months. This theme was re-echoed in April of 1963 by COMUSMACV and by
the intelligence community through an NIE. All the statistics and evalu-
ations pointed to GVN improvement. While noting general progress, the
NIE stated that the situation remains flexible. Even as late as July
1963 a rosy picture was being painted by DIA and SACSA. The first sug-
gestion of a contrary evaluation within the bureaucracy came from INR.
Noting disquieting statistical trends since July, an unpopular INR memo
stated that the "pattern showed steady decline over a period of more than
three months duration." It was greeted with a storm of disagreement,
and in the end was disregarded.

The first, more balanced evaluation came with the McNamara-Taylor
trip report late in Septenber and October, 1963. While it called the
political situation "deeply serious," even this report was basically opti-
mistic about the situation, and saw little danger of the political crisis
affecting the prosecution of the war.

Not until after the Diem coup, the assassination of President Kennedy,
and the December Vietnam trip of Secretary McNamara was the Vietnam situa-
tion accurately assessed. In Secretary McNamara.*s December memo to the
President, after his trip, he wrote: "The situation is very disturbing.
Current trends, unless reversed in the next 2-3 months, will lead to a
neutralization at best and more likely to a communist-controlled state."
One of the most serious deficiencies he found was a "grave reporting weak-
ness on the U.S. side." Mr. McNamara's judgment, apparently, was not

vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
