Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

centers of population, make plans for the conduct of operations
and assure their efficient execution by military and police forces
completely responsive to its authority, It must have the means

to cope with the enemy reactions which must be expected to result
from any change in the pattern of our operations.

I (the President) particularly request that you and your colleagues
in the American Country Team develop and execute a concerted effort
to bring home to all groups in South Vietnam the paramount impor-
tance of national unity against the Communist enemy at this critical
time. It is a matter of the greatest difficulty for the U.S. govem-
ment to require great sacrifice of American citizens when reports
from Saigon reportedly give evidence of heedless self-interest and

. Shortsightedness among nearly all major groups in South Vietnam...

While effectiveness is largely a subjective judgement, progress in
certain specific areas such as those listed below provide some
tangible measure, The U.S. mission should urge upon the GVN parti-
cular efforts in these fields....

(1) Improve the use of manpower for military and pacification
purposes,

(2) Bring the armed forces and police to authorized strength
and maximize their effectiveness.

(3) Replace incompetent officials and commanders; freeze the
competent in place for extended periods of service,

(4) Clarify and strengthen police powers of arrest, detention,
and interrogation of VC suspects.

(5) Clarify and strengthen the authority of provincial chiefs,

(6) Make demonstrable progress in the HOP TAC operation around
Saigon.

(7) Broaden and intensify the civic action program using both
military and civilian resources to produce tangible evidence of
the desire of the government to help the hamlets and villages.

(8) Carry out a sanitary clean up of Saigon.

While progress was being made toward these goals, the U.S. would be

willing to strike harder at infiltration routes in Laos and at sea and, in
conjunction with the Lao Government, add U.S. air power to operations to

101 ; . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
