56.

we

58.

29+

60.

6l.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive é
Page

Korean President Syngman Rhee proposes sending a ROKA

Division to Indochina, but the Joint Chiefs of Staff

recommend that the transfer would not be in the best

interests of the Free World. JCS Memorandum for

Secretary of Defense, 1 March 1954. ..ccesescccssccvecscvssess 09
The JCS express concern over developments in the status

of the MAAG Chief to Indochina relative to a considerable

increase in personnel and scope of training responsibili-

ties. The French feel that "it should be clearly under-

stood that neither O'Daniel nor MAAG was to have any

powers, advisory or otherwise" in planning operations or

training the national armies. The JCS feels a demotion

of O'Daniel in deference to Navarre is detrimental to

U. S. prestige. JCS Memorandum for Secretary of Defense,

G March 1G5lavocaseowws coven naseensen sieceuss alceeenoerseeaee ICot

In the preparation of Defense Department views regarding
negotiations on Indochina for the Geneva Conference, the

JCS reaffirm their position concerning the strategic

importance of Indochina to the security interests of the

United States as reflected in NSC 5405. JCS Memorandum

for Secretary of Defense, 12 March 1954....ececccsecececeeess 206

General Erskine submits the President's Special Committee
recommendations on the military implications of the U. 5S.

position on Indochina at Geneva. The analysis concludes

that "no solution to the Indochina problem short of

victory is acceptable." The conclusions expressed are

felt to merit consideration by the NSC and the President.

Erskine Memorandum for the Special Committee, NSC, 7

RY Marr CH TOG aiaccle naw wets wre wiaiowerate evi gta's Oe berks caves! ee

Secretary of Defense, Charles E. Wilson, is fully in

accord with the JCS views (Document No. 43) and General

Erskine's recommendations (Document No. 44), and recon-

mends to Secretary Dulles that they be carefully con-

sidered in preparation for the Geneva Confererice.

Wilson letter to Dulles, 23 March 1954....ccsccececsevssscvcs 270

General Ely feels that any air intervention at Dien Bien

Phu would have to come from Chinese territory and would

carry grave consequences. "Can direct intervention by

U. S,. aircraft be envisaged and, if such is the case,

how would it take place?" See Annex A of Document 63,

page ©77. General Ely Memorandum to Admiral Radford,

Bs (Merl TOSIG. Uc lee Bee hee sie oi-w els SB alate alck-os mate vaanee 7ee8

so TOP SECRET - Sensitive
