Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"2, Authoritative and compelling administration of the
efforts of civilian agencies.

"I believe we can institute effective administration of
the RD program -- which Ambassador Lodge has aptly described
as the heart of the matter -- achieving all of these ideals:

"1. Maintain the effect and the appearance of civilian
* control by immediately assigning overall supervision of all
RD activities to Ambassador Porter (and assigning a second

deputy to Ambassador Lodge to absorb the substantial other

responsibilities now met by Ambassador Porter).

"2. That the several civilian lines of command within
agencies be consolidated into one. Thus, USAID, JUSPAO, OSA,
and the Embassy personnel assigned to RD all would continue
under the nominal administrative control of their respective
agencies but full, unified operational control would rest
solely with Ambassador Porter.

"3. That Ambassador Porter's authority be made clear and
full to each constituent agency of the RD team, including:

-- relocation of personnel;

-- the establishment of priorities irrespective of
agency priorities;

-- and the apportionment of the funds allocated by
each agency to Viet-Nam, bounded only by statutory
limitations.

"h, That MACV immediately give highest-level command focus
and consolidation to its RD concerns and staff, now that it is
no longer so completely distracted from RD by the compelling
requirements of main force combat. This would be organized
around the thesis that the central need is the most effective
persuasive power or leverage on RVNAF, This thesis is strengthened
substantially by:

-- The firm intent, expressed to us in Saigon last
week, of President Thieu and Prime Minister Ky
to shift ARVN infantry to revolutionary develop-
ment work starting in January;

-- The enhanced powers they intend to give to General
Thang, already an able chief'of RD for GVN.

"S, That the MACV effort embrace at least advisory control
over all levels of force -- starting with ARVN but also ineclud-
ing RF, P¥, CIDG, and the se meg ot operations of the RD
cadre, PFF, and PRV.

97 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
