Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In describing what was required to improve the situation in South
Vietnam, Mr. McNamara identified measures that "will involve a limited
increase in U.S. personnel and in direct Defense Department costs. More
significantly they involve significant increases in Military Assistance
Program costs....," plus "additional U.S. economic aid to support the
increased GVN budget." The estimated additional annual MAP costs would
come to between $30 and $40 million each year, plus a one-time additional
cost of $20 million for military equipment. In the recommendation section
of the report, the Secretary listed the following 12 itens:

1. To make it clear that we are prepared to furnish assistance
and support to South Vietnam for as long as it takes to bring
the insurgency under control.

2. To make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government
and are opposed to any further coups.

3. Yo support a Program for National Mobilization (including a
national service law) to put South Vietnam on a war footing.

4, To assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces (regular
plus paramilitary) by at least 50,000 men.

5 To assist the Vietnamese to create a greatly enlarged Civil
Administrative Corps for work at province, district and hemlet
levels.

6. To assist the Vietnamese to improve and reorganize the para-
military forces and to increase their compensation.

{. To assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla force.

8. To provide the Vietnamese Air Force 25 A-1H aircraft in exchange
for the present T-28s.

9. To provide the Vietnamese army additional M-113 armored personnel
carriers (withdrawing the M-llis there), additional river boats,
and approximately $5-10 million of other additional material.

10. TO announce publicly the Fertilizer Program and to expand it
with a view within two years to trebling the amount of fertilizer
made ayailable.

li. To authorize continued high-level U.S. overflights of South
Vietnam's borders and to authorize “hot pursuit" and South Viet-
namese ground operations over the Laotian line for the purpose
of border. control. More ambitious operations into Laos involving
units beyond battalion size should be authorized only with the
approval of Souvanna Phouma. Operations across the Cambodian
border should depend on the state of relations with Cambodia.

.

3) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
