Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

this point. What was seen as an issue was whether the limits of
reasonable U.S. aid extended to the point of sending American troops
to fight the Viet Cong. But even this was subdued, There had been,
as noted before, the leaked stories playing down the prospects that
combat troops would be sent, and then, immediately on Taylor's return,
the unattributed but obviously authoritative stories that Kennedy was
opposed to sending troops and Taylor was not recommending them.

In a most important sense, this situation distorts the story
told in this account, For this account inevitably devotes a great
deal of space to the decision that was not made -- that of sending
ground troops -- and very little space to the important decisions
that were made, There is simply nothing much to say abcut these lat-
ter decisions: except that they were apparently taken for granted at
the time. Even today, with all the hindsight available, it is very
hard to imagine Kennedy or any other President responding to the
situation faced in 1961 by doing significantly less about Vietnam than
he did. The only choices seen then, as indeed even today the only
choices seem to have been, whether to do more. And it is on how that
question was resolved, inevitably, that any account of the period will
be focused,

The Administration faced (contrary to the impression given to the
public both before and after the decisions) two major issues when
Taylor returned,

1. What conditions, if any, would be attached to new American
aid? The Taylor Report implicitly recommended none. But the leaked
stories in the press following Taylor's return showed that some in the
Administration inclined to a much harder line on Diem than the sum-
mary paper of the report. For example, A Times dispatch of November 5,
from its Pentagon correspondent, reported that Diem would be expected
to “undertake major economic, social, and military reforms to provide
a basis for increased U.S, support." 4/ c

2. Would the limited commitment of ground foces recommended by
Taylor be undertaken? The news stories suggested they would, although
this would be apparent only to those who had seen Taylor's "Ryes Only"
cables, The story appearing the day after the report was submitted,
despite the flat statements against the use of combat troops, also
stated that Taylor had recommended "the dispatch of more specialists
in anti-guerrilla warfare to train Vietnamese troops, communications
and transportation specialists, and army engineers to help the Viet-
was more explicit. It is noted that officials seemed to rule out the
use of U.S. combat forces, "the move considered here a few weeks ago."
But "at the same time it appears that Army engineers, perhaps in
unusually large numbers, may be sent to help on flood control work

115

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
