Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

- TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Tt is important to United States security interests
that all practicable measures be taken to prevent further
communist expansion in Southeast Asia. Indochina is a key
area of Southeast Asia and is under immediate threat.

"The neighboring countries of Thailand and Burma
could be expected to fall under Communist domination if
Indochina were controlled by a Communist-dominated govern-
ment. The balance of Southeast Asia would then be in grave
hazard." _2/

3. Impact of Start of Korean War

The outbreak of the Korean War, and the American decision to
resist North Korean aggression, sharpened overnight our thoughts and
actions with respect to Southeast Asia. The American military response
symbolized in the most concrete manner possible the basic belief that
holding the line in Southeast Asia was essential to American security
interests. The French struggle in Indochina came far more than before
to be seen as an integral part of the containment of communism in that
region of the world. Accordingly, the United States intensified and
enlarged its programs of aid in Indochina. Military aid shipments to
Indochina acquired in 1951 the second highest priority, just behind the
Korea war program.

A consequence of the Korean War, and particularly the Chinese
intervention, was that China replaced the Soviet Union as the principal
source of the perceived communist threat in Southeast Asia. This was
made explicit in NSC 124/2 (June 1952) which stated that "the danger of
an overt military attack against Southeast Asia is inherent in the
existence of a hostile and aggressive Communist China."

The "domino principle" in its purest form was written into the
"General Considerations" section of NSC 124/2. It linked the loss of any

single state of Southeast Asia to the stability of Europe and the security

of the United States!

"2. Communist domination, by whatever means, of all
Southeast Asia would seriously endanger in the short term,
and critically endanger in the longer term, United States
security interests. ;

"a. The loss of any of the countries of Southeast
Asia to communist control as a consequence of overt or covert
Chinese Communist aggression would have critical psycholog-
ical, political and economic consequences. In the absence of
effective and timely counteraction, the loss of any single
country would probably lead to relatively swift submission
to or an alignment with communism by the remaining countries
of this group. Furthermore, an alignment with communism of

A-4:7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
