Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

military and civilian liaison team was sent to Hanoi and a
Chinese counterpart to Saigon. The British in Hanoi at first
made little progress with the Chinese but General Gallagher
understands they have since made more headway.

"The Chinese 60th Army in the south of the Chinese zone and
the 93rd Army around Hanoi, both totalling some 50 thousand men,
have been told to concentrate for removal to Manchuria, but whether
they have actually moved out or not General Gallagher does not know.
By December, however, the Chinese 53rd Army had begun to come in
from Yunnan and would probably provide replacements for the other
two Armies.

"General:Gallagher noted that magnetic mines have not been
entirely cleared at least from the northern ports and that the
threat provided by these mines has helped and would continue to
help .keep the French from undertaking large-scale landing opera-
tions in that area. He felt that regular rail communications
between Saigon and Hanoi might not be opened for another year." *

In early 1946, Ho Chi Minh attempted to bring Ngo Dinh Diem into
his government, but Diem, whose brother, Ngo Dinh Khoi, had been killed
by the Viet Minh, refused. In February, attacks on Ho from both the com-
munist left and the non-Viet Minh nationalists reached such intensity
that Ho reportedly proposed his own resignation, and the forming of a
state under Bao Dai. ho/ The Bao Dai substitution, Ho felt, would not
only mollify his internal foes, but improve the DRV's position with the
Americans and French: to the U.S. Ho had sent a series of unanswered
appeals for internationalizing Vietnam; and with the French, Ho had
opened talks trending toward a French-protected, French-recognized, inde-
pendent DRV.

(2) The Government of 2 March 1946

The National Assembly "elected in January met on 2 March
1946, and approved the new DRV government at its opening session. Its
top echelon of 12 contained only @ ICP members, but 3 VNQDD and 1 Dong
Minh Hoi; Ho remained President, but his Vice President was the leader: of
the Dong Minh Hoi, and the key portfolios of Interior and Defense went
to neutrals.

The new government faced at the outset a crisis in relations with
France. Though General Leclerc's “pacification” operations in South Viet-
nam had fallen short of expectations, French troops and shipping had arrived
in Indochina in sufficient quantity for them to contemplate operations in
North Vietnam. Simultaneously, the French undertook negotiations with
the Chinese, seeking to have them relinquish their occupation of North
Vietnam, and with the DRV, seeking to have it accept the reintroduction

* Reproduced from Memorandum of Conversation by Mr. Richard L. Sharp,
of the Division of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State,
dated January 30, 1946.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-h6 ee ee
