Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. Search and Destroy Strategy

Almost in reaction to the dearth of proposals to seize the initia-
tive from the enemy, General Westmoreland provided consistent pressure
for a free hand to maneuver U.S. and Third Cowmtry forces in South
Vietnam. His search and destroy strategy, which was given Presidential
sanction during the summer of 1965, was articulated by both Westmoreland
and the JCS in keeping with sound military principles garnered by men
accustomed to winning. The basic idea behind the strategy was the desire
to take the war to the enemy, denying him freedom of movement anywhere
in the country and taking advantage of the superior firepower and maneu-
verability of U.S. and Third Country forces to deal him the heaviest
possible blows. In the meantime, the RVNAF, with superior knowledge of
the population and the role of the Viet Cong, would be free to concen-
trate their efforts in populated areas.

The strategy of search and destroy was given approval at a time when
there was very little hope for results from the Rolling Thunder program.
The bombing became, therefore, an adjunct to the ground strategy as the
war in the South assumed first priority. Accompanying the strategy was
a subtle change of emphasis -- instead of simply denying the enemy vic-
tory and convincing him that he could not win, the thrust became defeat-
ing the enemy in the South. This was sanctioned implicitly as the only
way to achieve the U.S. objective of a non-communist South Vietnam. It
was conceivable, of course, that sometime before total defeat the North
Vietnamese and the Viet Cong might decide that they had had enough. In
this event, the U.S. could halt its efforts short of complete defeat of
the insurgents and negotiate a settlement to the conflict from a much
stronger position than that offered by any of the alternate strategies.

The strategy described above with all its implications evolved in
piecemeal fashion during Jume and July 1965. Westmoreland was first
given authority in June to commit U.S. ground forces anywhere in the
country when, in his judgment, they were needed to strengthen the rela-
tive position of the RVNAF. His first major operation with U.S. troops
under the new aegis was on 27 June, and that force made a deep penetration
into the Viet Cong base area of War Zone "D" NW of Saigon. Once the
forces had been liberated from the restrictions of the coastal enclaves,
the next step was to decide how much reinforcement was needed in order
to insure that the Viet Cong and their North Vietnamese allies could not
win. The force decided upon was 44 U.S. and Third Country battalions, +
and.the President approved that number sometime in mid-July. Finally,
the amount of additional force required to seize the initiative from the
enemy and to commence the "win" phase of the strategy was the next topic
of discussion after the 44 battalions had been approved. Secretary
McNamara received Westmoreland's first estimate during talks in Saigon,
16 to 20 July 1965. Based on what he knew then of Viet Cong and DRV
intentions and capabilities, Westmoreland asked for 24 additional

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
