Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -- Sensitive

addition, three ranger, one marine and three airborne battalions were
to have been assigned a mission of direct support of RD. There were
eight U.S. battalions with an RD mission and other FWMAF contributed
three battalions. 29/ Some American observers, however, were less
than pleased with the ardor for RD which the Vietnamese were displaying.
One source in III CTZ observed that:

",»eThe late 1966 enthusiasm which helped to launch
1967 RD progress has yet to work its way down to the dis-
trict and village level where the impact mist be realized.

"The monthly meeting of the III CTZ RD council, sched-
uled for 3 February, was postponed, probably due to prepar-
ations for TET. The efficiency of the RD cadre teams
continues in most areas to be marginal. Since the success
of the entire 1967 hamlet program will be largely dependent
upon the performance and accomplishments of these teams,
their efficiency must be improved...." 30/

Such views undoubtedly contributed to the basic uneasiness about whether
ARVN could (or would) “cut the RD mustard," a fear voiced by Holbrooke
a month earlier.

Briefly, analyzing the pattern of operations (see "Major Operations
and Approximate Locations," next page) some sixty-two of the United States
maneuver battalions in Vietnam were engaged at some time on what MACV
permed) “Jerge voperations." Realizing that the criterion for Jarge opera-

“tions of "100 or more enemy dead” is not necessarily the best for our

purposes, and that such actions were influenced by the monsoon patterns,
at least a rough picture of the operational center of gravity can be
developed. Of the sixty-two battalions so engaged, twenty-six were
participating on missions which had an RD component -- either protecting
the harvest, screening the local population, or keeping routes open so
the crops could reach market. ‘Thus, the U.S. was devoting approximately
25-30% of its forces in January 1967 to RD effort country-wide, although
this simple statistic is misleading because some of the operations listed
were combination search and destroy/RD actions. No major ARVN combat
operations were specifically designed to support RD objectives, although
as we noted earlier, on a battalion level basis an increasing number of
Vietnamese units were being assigned such tasks. 31

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
35
