Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CINCPAC added a telling note to General Westmoreland's comments
when he said we needed the 9th MEB for insurance should the GVM be un-
able to resist collapse in the critical area of Da Nang where so much
was already committed. oh/

LS Enemy Capabilities

Despite some encouraging signs in January 1965, the official assess-
ments of the military situation emanating from Saigon were bleak. The F
GVN armed forces had suffered a major defeat at Binh Gia, Phuoc Tuy
Province, in late December-early January. There, the Viet Cong, fight-
ing for the first time with coordinated units of regimental size, had
stood off the best that ARVN could offer and held their ground. To
many observers, including General Westmoreland, Binh Gia signaled the
long-expected beginning of Phase III of the insurgency. The Viet Cong
were confident enough to abandon their hit-and-run guerrilla tactics
and engage the GVN armed forces in conventional ground combat.

Although the rate of Viet Cong activity in January was the lowest
in 11 months, it was surmised that they were merely regrouping and
planning their next steps. Sure enough, during the month of February
the VC reappeared in force and carried out a series of successful raids
and attacks, including those on the U.S. installations in Pleiku end Qui
Nhon. The CIA in its February Sitrep was prompted to declare that the
eritical province of Binh Dinh in the II Corps area was just about lost
to the Viet Cong. 25/ Binh Dinh is a key province for a number of
reasons. Highway 1, the major north-south road artery connecting the
I Corps with Saigon, runs the length of Binh Dinh. Of equal importance
is Highway 19 which runs west from Qui Nhon through An Khe to the city
of Pleiku. Qui Nhon, a coastal city at the eastern end of Highway 19,
offers one of the few viable port alternatives to Saigon and is a major
logistical base for resupply to the upland bases and camps. Loss of
control of Highway 19 dictates that friendly forces in the highlands
be resupplied entirely by air -- a staggering prospect. Finally, the
large population in Binh Dinh, numbering some 800,000, offers great
prospects for manpower and sustenance to the side able to control the
province. 26, -

Intelligence estimates began stating that the coming rainy season
would be accompanied by a major Viet Cong attempt to cut the country
in half in the II Corps. It was quite possible that the VC would
attempt during such a campaign to seize complete control of one of the
highland provinces, most probably Kontum, and would then proceed to set
up a NLF government therein. The political and psychological effect
of such a move might, some observers feared, sound the death knell for
the GVN. General Westmoreland, in his February Monthly Evaluation added
plaintively that he hoped the air activity in North and South Vietnam
would help reverse the trend. 27/ ;

In October of 1964, the National Intelligence Board in Washington
had published a grave picture of the situation in South Vietnam. In

*

At TOP SECRET - Sensitive
