Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Taylor noted that there was a danger of
reasoning ourselves into inaction. From a military point
of view, he said that the U.S. could function in South-
east Asia ebout as well as anywhere in the world except
Cuba. Mr. McCone made the point that the passage of the
Congressional resolution would in itself be an enormous
deterrent. This led to brief discussion of the text of
the resolution, which was read by Mr. Sullivan...

Discussion then shifted to what the Viet Cong could
do in South Vietnam if we struck the North. General
Westmoreland thought there was not a significant unused.
Viet Cong capability, but Ambassador Lodge thought there
was @ major capability for terrorism and even for mili-
tary action against Saigon, and that in sum the Viet Cong
"could make Saigon uninhabitable.'"” 105/

Finally, the conferees dealt with the crucial question of how soon
the United States and the GVN would be prepared to engage in wider military
actions should the need arise. For several reasons, the consensus seemed
to be that such actions should be delayed for some time yet. "Secretary
Rusk thought we should not be considering quick action unless the Pathet
Lao lunged toward the Mekong." Discussion yielded several things we could
do in the interim to strensthen the current government position in Laos
(i.e., re-equip Kong Le's neutralist forces as an aid to Phouma's FAR;
back Souvanna's demand for preconditions before any reconvening of the
Geneva Conference; support the RLAF T-28 operations). General Taylor pointed
to the prior need to educate the American public regarding U.S. interests
in Southeast Asia. Secretary McNamara thought this would require at least
30 days.

Generals Taylor and Westmoreland then listed a number of military
factors that affected the question of timing, although stating that these
referred. to "an optimum military posture”: ;

1. The additional Vietnamese aircraft would not
be available until July for two squadrons and September
for another. However, B-57's could be introduced at any
time .and operated on a FARMGATE basis.

2. There were logistic factors, shipping require-
ments, and the call-up of some logistic reserve units in-
volved in having five-seven divisions ready for action,
and these ‘ould take two months to be scrted out properly.

3. It was desirable if not essential to build up
military manpower in South Vietnam. He would like to
be in a position to have 12 battalions that could be
freed for deployment along the Laos border.

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
