Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 33
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Estimate that the program of air activity against the North, while it
might ultimately succeed in causing the DRV to cease its support of the
war, would not in the short run have any major effect on the situation in
-the South. The RVNAF, although at the moment performing fairly well,
would not be able in the face of a VC summer offensive to hold in the
South long enough for the bombing to become effective. 9/ :

Realistic assessments of the situation in March notwithstanding,
some of the parlance in cables and messages between Washington and Saigon
expressed conviction that the situation in Vietnam was well in hand, and
resisted radical changes or even urgent revision of ongoing U.S. programs.
Ambassador Taylor, for example, reacted strongly to proposals that U.S.
military-civil affairs personnel be introduced into the aid effort, and
told McGeorge Bundy that the GVN was winning the war without such help.
Taylor said: "

"I am greatly troubled by DOD 152339Z April 15 /a cable
from McNaughton to Saigon containing a seven point program
with ‘highest authority' sanction./ First, it shows no
consideration for the fact that, as a result of decisions
taken in Washington during my visit, this mission is charged
with securing implementation by the two month old Quat govern-
ment of a 21 point military program, a 41 point non-military
program, a 16 point Rowan USIS program and a 12 point CIA
program. Now this new cable opens up new vistas of further
points as if we can win here somehow on a point score. We
are going to stall the machine of government if we do not
declare a moratorium on new programs for at least six months.

"Next, it shows a far greater willingness to get into the
ground war than I had discerned in Washington during my recent
trip. Although some additional U.S. forces should probably be
introduced after we see how the Marines do in counterinsurgency
operations, my own attitude is reflected in EMBTEL 3384, which
I hope was called to the attention of the President.

"My greatest concern arises over para 6 reftel which frankly
bewilders me. What do the authors of this cable think the mission
has been doing over the months and years? We have presumably the
best qualified personnel the Washington agencies (State, AID, DOD,
USIA, and CIA) can find working in the provinces seven days a week
at precisely the tasks described in para 6. Is it proposed to
withdraw these people and replace them by Army civil affairs types
operating on the pattern of military occupation? If this is the
thought, I would regard such a change in policy which will gain
wide publicity, as disastrous in its likely efforts upon pacifi-
cation in general and on US/GVN relations in particular.

"Mac, can't we be better protected from our friends? I know

that everyone wants to help, but there's such a thing as killing
with kindness. In particular, we want to stay alive here because

ks TOP SECRET - Sensitive
