Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

modest steps. For under the CIP we were already planning to pay support
costs for 150,000 men of the RVNAF and 32,000 men of the Civil Guard. This
Task Force proposal, which had been urged for some weeks by MAAG in Saigon,
simply said that we would provide the same support for all the Vietnamese
forces that we had already planned to provide for most of them.

For the rest, the Presidential Program in its final form, issued
May 19, turned out (after a great deal of stirring around) to be close to
that proposed in the April 26 draft.

Two comments are needed on this material. First, the program Lansdale
and Gilpatric proposed was not so narrowly military as the repeated em-
phasis on priority for the internal security problem might suggest. Rather,
the emphasis was on stabilizing the countryside, in contrast to pressing
Diem on political and administrative reforms mainly of interest to Diem's
urban critics. This reflected both Lansdale's judgments on counter-
insurgency, which look good in hindsight, and his strongly pro-Diem
orientation, which looks much less good.

Second, the reference to a communist "master plan" for Southeast Asia
(and Similar language is found in a number of other staff papers through
the balance of 1961) suggests a view of the situation which has been much
eriticized recently by men like Galbraith and Kennan. Public comments by
those who were closely involved (both those critical of policy since 1965,
such as Sorenson and Hilsmea, and those supporting the Administration,
such as William Bundy) Suggest a more sophisticated view of the problem.
Here we simply note that the formal staff work available strongly supports
Galbraith and Kennan, although this does not necessarily imply that the
senior members of the Administration shared the view that North Vietnam was
operating (in the words of another staff paper ) as the "implementing agent
of Bloc policy" rather than in fairly conventional, mainly non-ideological
pursuit of its own national interest. 8/

ITT. LANSDATLE'S ROLE

In his April 27 memorandum transmitting the Report to the President,
Gilpatric noted that:

eosin the short time available to the Task Force it was not
possible to develop the program in complete detail. However,
there has been prepared a plan for mutually supporting actions
of a political, military, economic, psychological, and covert
character which can be refined periodically on the basis of
further recommendations from the field.

Toward this end, Brigadier General E.G. Lansdale, USAF, who
has been designated Operations Officer for the Task Force, will
proceed to Vietnam immediately after the program receives

28
2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
