tN

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to take several measures that had been recommended earlier and which were
now seen as useful means of turning an essentially unique and localized
incident into an event with broader strategic impact. The extent to which
the strategic utility of these actions was perceived during the two days
between the ircidents is not clear. Certai:ly the disposition of U.S.S.
Constellation does not suggest a picture of intensive preparation for a
planned series of new military and political pressures against North ;
Vietnam. Moreover, there is no record in the usual sources of the series
of staff meetings, task assignments and memoranda that typically accompany
preparations for coordinated political and military initiatives. What -
ever Was contemplated between 2 and 4 August, the deliberations immediately
preceding the reprisal decision seem to have been largely ad hoc, both
within DOD and among the President's principal advisers.

The most reasonable explanation for the actions which accompanied
the reprisals, and for the rapidity of their implementation, is the fact
that each of them had been proposed and staffed in detail months before.
These “on the shelf" options had been recommended unanimously by the
principal officials responsible for security matters in Southeast Asia.
The fact that they were implemented in August indicates that the President
did not disapprove of them, but rather that the domestic and international
political environments had probably been judged inappropriate earlier in
the summer. The measures apparently had been considered either too costly
or too risky (perhaps politically or perhaps in terms of: communist reactions),
given the President's election strategy and his policy theme of “maximum
effect with minimum escalation". The kind of circumstances created by the
Tonkin Gulf affair enabled them to be carried out at lower cost and with
less risk. The promptness with which these actions were to be taken now
is perhaps as much a direct result of the President's well-known political
astuteness and keen sense of timing as any other single factor.

One of the first actions taken was to deploy additional U.S. mili-
tary forces to the Western Pacific. This was done in part as a measure
to deter any hostile responses by Hanoi or Peking to the reprisal raids.
It also enabled making a stronger signal of U.S. resolve to defend its
interests throughout Southeast Asia, as recommended at the end of May.
Orders directing the deployment of selected 37-64 forces and the alerting
of others were dispatched from the Pentagon shortly after the President's
meeting with Congressional leaders on the evening of 4 August. Shortly
after midnight, on > August, and again later in the day, Secretary McNamara
- announced the specific measures by which U.S. military capabilities around
Southeast Asia were being augmented:

"Bares, an attack carrier group hat been transferred from
the First Fleet on the Pacific coast to the Western Pacific.
Secondly, interceptor and fighter bomber aircraft have been
moved into South Vietnam. Thirdly, fighter bomber aircraft have
been moved into Thailand. Fourthly, interceptor and fighter

12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
2UP SECRET -~ Sensitive
