eiuielsieeedl iehialanen Eid eae a ee

rd

teat

ee tae ae

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

* TOP SECRET

weapons, transportation Signal equipment and level of supply. It
{3 inferior to Viet Minh in mobility. The Army needs:

A) Mininwm 9 additional battalions in North Tonkin
erea, to meke a limited offensive possible, These battalions
are not avallable in Indochina and nust come from France or
its possessions. :

(B) Weapons’ and equipment to supplement materiel now in
use and to replace unserviceable materiel, Adequate spare
parts must be furnished,

Navy: Navy hes complete Naval superiorlty and can operate
freely elong thse coast; and inlend waterways provided formations
of armored craft are used, Navy mission is:

(A) To support ground forces in shore operations by pro-
viding shipping convoys for the transportation of personnel
and equipment;

{B) To furnish gunfire support and maintain control of
off shore areas to prevent Viet Minh smuggling and possible
amphibious assault. The Navy has moved additional emphibious
craft and commando units to Tonkin

b) To prevent possible flanking by sea and

Cc To conduct operations with ground force along
inland watervays. The flexibility and ability to move
concentrations rapidly as needed, made possible by employ-
ment of amphibious units, should prove a powerful advan-
tage in Delta fighting. At present the line of defense
is still too far inland to allow much Naval participa-
tion in active combat,

S To reinforce the line Haiphong-Moncay,

Air: Viet Minh air strength reported as 40 aircraft which

. can be successfully engaged by French Air Reserve. Viet Minh

anti aircraft artillery is negligible at this time (a few 20mm
guns have recently mede their first appearance). French have a
small and highly coordinated efficient air transport organization
for routine and emergency supply and troop movements which has
been operating for 3 years from Hanoi Bay. It is capable of ready
expansion, Military Air Transport can be supplemented by commer-
cial airlines. There is a specific need for light bombers, fighter
boribers, air transport craft and low level reconnaissance planes
for photography, The potential of the French Army, Navy and Air
supported by their greater resources of a11 kinds is greater than
Viet Minh potential, But as present closer coordination of the
action of theses forces is needed,

NSC 64/1 3 TOP SECRET

LOS
