Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I Vietnam and the U.S., 1940-19500 Vol.) 
A. U.S. Policy, 1940-1950 
B. The Character and Power of the Viet Minh 
C. Ho Chi Minh: Asian Tito? 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
· I 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I 
VIETNAJ>1 AND THE UNITED STATES 
1940 - 1950 
0295 
Sec Def Cout 
~~. X-___ ~~ ________ _ 
.' PART 1. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr 
Sensitive 
VIETNAM AND THE UNITED STATES 
1940 - 1950 
Foreword 
This portion of the study treats U.S. policy towards Vietnam in 
the decade of World War II and its aftermath. It is subdivided into 
three essays. 
Section A describes U.S. policy tOvlard Indochina ,and 
the developing conflict betloJeen France and the Viet Minh as vievTed 
from ~Tashington. Section B analyzes the character and pm'ler of the 
Viet Minh and probes the role of Vietnamese communists within the 
Viet Minh. 
Section C discusses Ho Chi Ninh' s political development 
to assess his potentiality for adopting neutrality in the East-West 
confrontation. 
Each monograph is supported by the maps and charts 
tabulated below. 
. 
Section A - U.S. Policy, 1940-1950 
Section B - The Character and Power of the Viet Minh 
Section C - Ho Chi Minh: 
Asian Tito? 
Maps and Charts 
(Blue Tabs) 
Cochinchina , Ann am , Tonkin 
France-Vietnam Relations 
Vietnam Nationalist Party 
CommQDist Party, 1921-1931 
Communist Party, 1931-1945 
Politics in North Vietnam, 1945 
Vietn~mese Governments, 1945-1949 
Viet Political Movements, 1947-1950 
Extent Viet Hinh Control, 1949 
Ho Chi Minh Chronology 
i 
TOP SECREr - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
n o 
-f»0 
OZ:I: 
~, ZZ 
~I » 0 
-~:I: 
Z ... _ 
Z » 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
THAILAND 
GULF OF SIAM 
A 
SOUTH 
t 
VIETNA!v.l 
ii 
( ~ 
• $" 
PH nt" 
,"',.~. : -. 
;;:0...:' 
Source: 
Cooper,Killigrew,and LaCharite', 
Case Studies in Insurgency and 
Revolutionary Warfare: Vietnam 
1941-1954(Washington:SORO,1964 ) 
· 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I 
I 
] 
] 
» 
o 
c 
-... 0 
'0 V\ 
~o 
J" 
-...Q.. 
'0 -. 
Oln 
o l,:c: 
1. A. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
u.S. POLICY, 1940-1950 
SUMl'flARY 
Significant misunderstanding has developed concerning U.S. policy 
towards Indochina in the decade of World War II and its aftermath. 
A 
number of historians have held that anti-colonialism governed U.S. policy 
and actions up until 1950, when containment of communism supervened. 
For example, Bernard Fall (e.g. in his 1967 post-mortem book, Last 
Reflections On a War) categorized American policy toward Indochina in 
six periods: "(I) Anti-Vichy, 1940-1945; (2) Pro-Viet Minh, 1945-1946; 
(3) Non-involvement, 
19l~6 - June 1950; (4) Pro-French, 1950 - July 1954; 
(5) Non-military involvement, 1954 - November 1961; (6) Direct and full 
;involvement, 1961 -
.11 
Commenting that the first four periods are those 
1I1east kno,m even to the specialist, II Fall developed the thesis that 
President Roosevelt was determined lito eliminate the French from Indo-
china at all costs, II and had pressured the Allies to establish an inter-
national trusteeship to administer Indochina until the nations there 
were ready to assume full independence. 
This obdurate anti-colonialism, 
in Fallis view, led to cold refusal of American aid for French resistance 
fighters, and to a policy of promoting Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh as 
the alternative to restoring the French bonds. 
But, the argument goes, 
Roosevelt died, and principle faded; by l at e 1946, anti-colonialism 
mutated into neutrality. 
According to Fall: 
IIvlhether this was due to 
a deliberate policy in Washington or, conversely, to an absence of policy, 
is not quite clear ...• The United States, preoccupied in Europe, ceased to 
be a diplomatic factor in Indochina until the outbreak of the Korean War . II 
In 1950, anti-communism asserted itself, and in a remarkable volte-·face) 
the United States thre"l its economj_c and military resources behind France 
in its "rar against the Viet Minh. 
other commentators, conversely --
prominent among them, the historians of the Viet Minh -- have described 
U.S. policy as consistently condoning and assisting the reimpOSition of t 
French cQlonial power in Indoch~na , with a concomitant disregard for the 
nationalj,st aspirations of the Vietnamese . 
Neither interpretation squares with the record; the United States 
was less concerned over Indochina, and less purposeful than either assumes. 
Ambivalence characterized U.S. policy during World War II, and was the 
root of much subsequent misunderstanding. 
On the one hand, the U.S. 
repeatedly reassured the French that its colonial possessions would be 
returned to it after the war . 
On the other hand, the U.S. broadly com-
mitted itself in the Atlantic Charter to support national self-determination, 
and President Roosevelt personally and vehemently advocated independence 
for Indochina . 
F.D.R. r egarded Indochina as a flagrant example of onerous 
colonialism which should be turned over to a trusteeship rather than 
returned to France. 
The President discussed this proposal ,-lith the Allies 
at the Cairo, Teheran, and Yalta Conferences and received the endorse-
ment of Chiang Kai-shek and Stalin; Prime Minister Churchill demurred. 
A-I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
At one point, Fall reports, the President offered General de Gaulle 
Filipino advisers to help France establish a "more progressive policy 
in Indochina " -- which offer the General received in "pensive silence." 
Ultimately, U.S. policy was governed neither by the principles of 
the Atlantic Charter, nor by the President's anti-colonialism, but by 
the dictates of military strategy, and by British intransigence on the 
colonial issue. 
The United States, concentrating its forces against 
Japan, accepted British military primacy in Southeast Asia, and divided 
Indochina at 16th parallel behreen the British and the Chinese for the 
purposes of occupation. 
U.S. commanders serving .lith the British and 
Chinese, while instructed to avoid ostensible alignment with the French, 
were permitted to conduct operations in Indochina which did not detract 
from the campaign- against Japan. 
Consistent with F.D.R. IS guidance, the 
U.S. did provide modest aid to French--and Viet Minh--resistance forces 
in Vietnam after March, 1945, but refused to provide shipping to move 
'Free French troops there. 
Pressed by both the British and the French 
for clarification of U.S. intentions r egarding the political status of 
Indochina, F.D.R. maintained that "it is a matter for postwar." 
The President's trusteeship concept foundered as early as March 
1943, when the U.S. discovered that the British, concerned over possi-
ble prejudice to Commonwealth policy, proved to be unwilling to join 
in any declaration on trusteeships, and indeed any statement endorsing 
national independence which went beyond the Atlantic Charter's vague 
"respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government 
under which they "lvill live ." So sensitive .Tere the British on this 
point that the Dumbarton Oaks Conference of 1944, at which the blue-
print for the postwar international system was negotiated, skirted the 
colonial issue, and avoided trusteeships altogether. 
At each key 
decisional point at which the President could have influenced the 
course of events to.,ard trusteeship -- in relations with the U.K., in 
casting the United Nations Charter, in instructions to allied com-
manders -- he declined to do so; hence, despite his lip service to 
trusteeship and anti-colonialism, F.D.R. in fact assigned to Indochina 
a status correlative to Burma, Malaya, Singapore and Indonesia: 
free 
territory to be r econ<luered and returned to its former mmers. 
Non-
intervention by the U.S. on behalf of the Vietnamese was tantamount 
to acceptance of the French return. 
On April 3, 1945, .,ith President 
Roosevelt's approval, Secretary of State Stettinius issued a statement 
that, as a result of the Yalta talks, the U.S. would look to trustee-
ship as a postwar .arrangement only for "territories taken from the 
enemy," and for "territories as might voluntarily be placed under trust-
eeship." By context, and by the Secretary of State's subse<luent inter-
pretation, Indochina fell into the latter category. 
Trusteeship status 
for Indochina became, then, a matter for French determination. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A-2 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Shortly follol,ling President Truman 1 s entry into office} the U. S. 
assured France that it had never questioned} "even by implication} 
French sovereignty over Indo-China." The U.S. policy was to press 
France for progressive measures in Indochina} but to expect France to 
decide when its peoples would be ready for independence; "such deci-
sions would preclude the establishment of a trusteeship in Indochina 
except with the consent of the French Government." 
These guidelines} 
established by June} 1945 -- before the end of the war -- remained 
fundamental to U.S. policy. 
With British cooperation, French military forces were reestablished 
in South Vietnam in September, 1945. 
The U.S. expressed dismay at the 
outbreak of guerrilla warfare which followed} and pointed out that while 
it had no intention of opposing the reestablishment of French control} 
"it is not the policy of this government to assist the French to reestab-
lish their control over Indochina by force} and the vlillingness of the 
U.S. to see French control reestablished assumes that /Jh!:7 French claim 
to have the support of the population in Indochina is borne out by future 
events." 
Through the fall and winter of .l945-1946} the U.S. received a 
series of requests from Ho Chi Minh for intervention in Vietnam; these 
were, on the record, unanswered. 
Hovlever} the U.S. steadfastly refused 
to assist the French military effort} e.g.} forbidding American flag 
vessels to carry troops or 'iVar materiel to Vietnam. 
On March 6, 1946} 
the French and Ho signed an Accord in which Ho acceded to French re-
entry into North Vietnam in return for recognition 9f the DRV as a 
"Free State," part of the French Union. 
As of April 1946, allied occu-
pation of Indochina was officially terminated, and the U. S. acknovlledged 
to France that all of -Indochina had reverted to French control. 
There-
after, the problems of U.S. policy toward Vietnam were dealt with in the 
context of the U. S. relationship "lith France. 
(Tab 1) 
In late 1946, the Franco-Viet Minh War began in earnest. 
A chart 
(pp. A37 ff) sUIrJDlarizes the principal events in the relations behreen 
France and Vietnam, 1946-1949, describing the milestones along the route 
by -,.rhichFrance, on the one hand, failed to reach any lasting accommo-
dation -,.rith Ho Chi Minh, and, on the other hand, erected the "Bao Dai 
solution lt in its stead. 
The U.S. during these years continued to regard ' 
the conflict as fu..'t1damentally a matter for French resolution. 
The U.S. 
in its representations to France deplored the prospect of protracted war, 
and urged meaningful concessions to Vietnamese nationalism. 
However, 
the U.S., deterred by the history of Ho's communist affiliation, always 
stopped short of endorsing Ho Chi Minh or the Viet Minh. 
Accordingly, 
U.S. policy gravitated with that of France toward the Bao Dai solution. 
At no point was the U.S. prepared to adopt an openly interventionist 
course. 
To have done so would have clashed vlith the expressed British 
view that Indochina Has an exclusively French concern, and played into 
the hands of France's extremist political parties of both the Right and 
the Left. 
The U.S. was particularly apprehensive l est by intervening 
it strengthen the political position of French Communists. Moreover, 
A-3 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
in 1946 and 1947, France and Britain were moving toward an anti-
Soviet alliance in Europe, and the U.S. was reluctant to press a 
potentially divisive policy. ·The U.S. considered the fate of Viet-
namese nationalism relatively insignificant compared with European 
economic recovery and collective security from communist domination. 
It is not as though the U.S. was not prepared to act in circum-
stances such as these. 
For example, in the 1945-1946 dispute over 
Dutch possessions in Indonesia, the U.S. actively intervened against 
its Dutch ally. 
In this case, however, the intervention was in con-
cert with the U.K. (which steadfastly refused similar action in Indo-
china ) and against the Netherlands, a much less significant ally in 
Europe than France. 
In wider company and at projected lower cost, the 
U.S. could and did show.a determination to act against colonialism. 
The resultant U.S. policy has most often been termed "neutrality.1I 
It was, however, also consistent with the policy of deferring to French 
volition announced by President Roosevelt's Secretary of State on 
3 April 1945. 
It was a policy characterized by the same indecision 
that had marked U.S. wartime policy. 
Moreover, at the time, Indochina 
appeared to many to be one region in the troubled postwar world in 
which the U.S. might enjoy the luxury of abstention. 
In February, 
19~ ·7, early in the war, the U.S. Ambassador in Paris 
was instructed to reassure Premier Ramadier of the livery friendliest 
feelings " of the U.S. toward France and its interest in supporting 
France in recovering its economic, political and military strength: 
"In spite any misunderstanding which might have arisen 
in minds French in regard to our position concerning Indochina 
they must appreciate that we have fully recognized France(s 
sovereign position in that area and we do not wish to have 
it appear that we are in any .ray endeavoring undermine that 
position, and French should know it is our desire to be helpful 
and we I stand ready assist any appropriate vay we can to find 
solution for Indochinese' problem. . At same time ,.Te cannot 
shut our eyes to fact that there are two sides this problem 
and that our reports indicate both a lack French understanding 
of other side (more in Saigon than in Paris) and continued 
existence dangerously outmoded colonial outlook and methods 
in area. 
Furthermore, there is no escape from fact that trend 
of tim~S is to effect that colonial empires in XIX Century 
sense ~re rapidly becoming thing of past. 
Action Brit in India 
and Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are outstanding examples this 
trend)
~ and French themselves took cognizance of it both in new 
Constitution and in their agreements with Vietnam. 
On other 
hand wF. do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct 
Communist connections and it should be obvious that we are 
not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations sup-
planted by philosophy and political organizations emanating 
from and controlled by Kremlin ...• 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A-4 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
ltFrankly we have no solution of problem to suggest. It 
is basically matter for two parties to work out themselves 
and from your reports and those from Indochina we are led to 
feel that both parties have endeavored to keep door open 
to some sort of settlement. 
We appreciate fact that Vietnam 
started present fighting in Indochina on December 19 and that 
this action has made it more difficult for French to adopt a 
position of generosity and conciliation. 
Nevertheless we 
hope that French will find it possible to be more than gener-
ous in trying to find a solution." 
The U.S. anxiously followed the vacillations of France's policy 
toward Bao Dai, exhorting the French to translate the successive "agree-
ments" they contracted ,'lith him into an effective nationalist alternative 
to Ho Chi Min~ and the Viet Minh. 
Increasingly, the U.S. sensed that 
French unwillingness to concede political power to Vietnamese heightened 
the possibility of the Franco-Viet Minh conflict being transformed into 
a struggle with Soviet linperialism. 
U.S. diplomats were instructed to 
"apply such persuasion and/or pressure as is best calculated IJil pro-
duce desired result LOf France'i! unequivocally and promptly approving 
the principle of Viet independence ." France was notified that the U.S. 
was vTilling to extend financial aid to a Vietnamese government not a 
French puppet, "but could not give consideration of altering its present 
policy in this regard unless real progress iii! made in r eaching non-
Communist solution in Indochina based on cooperation of true nationalists 
of that country." 
As of 1948, however, the U.S. remained uncertain that Ho and the 
Viet Minh were in league with the Kremlin. 
A State Department appraisal 
of Ho Chi Minh in July 1948, indicated that: 
"1. 
Depts info indicates that Ho Chi Minh is Communist . 
His long and well-knmm record in Comintern during twenties 
and thirties , continuous support by French Com~unist news-
paper Humani te since 1945, praise given him by Radio Mosco"r 
(which for past six months has been devoting increasing attention 
to Indochina) and fact h~ has been called "leading communist" by 
recent Russian publications as well as Daily Worker makes any 
other conclusion appear to be wishful thinking. 
"2. 
Dept has no evidence of direct link between Ho and 
Mosco", but assumes it exists, nor is it able evaluate am01.mt 
pressure or 6~idance Moscow exerting. 
We have impression Ho 
must be given or is retaining large degree latitude. 
Dept 
considers that USSR accomplishing its immediate aims in Indo-
china by (a) pinning down large numbers of French troops, (b) 
causing steady drain upon French economy thereby tending retard 
recovery and dissipate ECA assistance to France, and (c) denying 
to world generally surpluses which Indochina normally has avail-
able thus perpetuating conditions of disorder and shortages 
A-5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
which favorable to grmvth communism. 
Furthermore, Ho seems 
quite capable of retaining and even strengthening his grip 
on Indochina with no outside assistance other than continuing 
procession of French puppet govts." 
In the fall of 19~.s, the Office of Intelligence Research in the Depart-
ment of State conducted a survey of communist influence in Southeast 
Asia. 
Evidence of Kremlin-directed conspiracy was found in virtually 
all countries except Vietnam: 
. "Since December 19, 1946, there have been continuous 
conflicts between French forces and the nationalist govern-
ment of Vietnam. 
This government is a coalition in i-lhich 
avovled communists hold influential positions. 
Although the 
French admit the influence of this government, they have 
consistently refused to deal with its l eader, Ho Chi Minh, 
on t4e grounds that he i s a communist. 
"To date the Vietnam press and radio haye not adopted an 
anti-American position. 
It is rather the French colonial 
press that has been strongly anti-American and has freely 
accused the U.S. of imperialism in Indochina to the point of 
approximating the official Moscow position. 
Although the 
Vietnam radio has been closely watched for a new position 
toward the U.S., no change has appeared so far. 
Nor does there 
seem to have been any split i-lithin the coalition government of 
Vietnam ..•. 
"Evaluation. If there is a Moscow-directed conspiracy 
in Southeast Asia, Indochina is an anomoly so far. 
Possible 
explanations are: 
i. 
No rigid directives have been issued by Moscm-l. 
2. 
The Vietnam government considers that it has no 
rightest ele~ents that must be purged. 
3. 
The Vietnam Communists are not subservient to 
the foreign policies pursued by Moscow. 
4. 
A special dispensation for the Vietnam government 
h~s been arranged in Moscow. 
"Of these possibilities, the first and fourth seem most likely." 
(Tab 2). 
The collapse of the Chinese Nationalist government in 1949 sharp-
ened American apprehensions over communist expansion in the Far East, 
and hastened U.S. measures to counter the threat posed by Maols China. 
t 
A-6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The U.S. sought to create and employ policy instruments similar to those 
it was bringing into play against the Soviets in Europe: 
collective 
security organizations) economic aid) and military assistance. 
For 
example) Congress) in the opening paragraphs of the law it passed in 
1949 to establish the first comprehensive military assistance program) 
expressed itself "as favoring the creation by the free countries and 
the free peoples of the Far East of a joint organization} consistent 
with the Charter of the United Nations) to establish a program of self-
help and mutual cooperation designed to develop their economic and social 
well-being) to safeguard basic rights and liberties) and to protect their 
security and independence .... " 
But) the negotiating of such an organiza-
tion among the disparate pmlers and political entities of the Far East .laS 
inherently more complex a matter than the North Atlantic Treaty nations 
had successfully faced .
. The U.S. decided that the impetus for collective 
security in Asia should come from the Asians) but by late 1949) it also 
recognized that action l-laS necessary in Indochina. 
Thus) in the closing 
months of 1949) the course of U.S. policy was set to block further com-
munist expansion in Asia: 
by collective security if the Asians were 
forthcoming; by collaboration with major European allies and commonwealth 
nations) if possible; but bilaterally if necessary. 
On that policy course 
lay the Korean War of 1950-1953) the forming of the Southeast Asia Treaty 
Organization of 1954) and the progressively deepening U.S. involvement in 
Vietnam. 
January and February) 1950) were pivotal months. 
The French took 
the first concrete steps toward transferring public ailininistration to Bao 
Da1 1s State of Vietnam. 
Ho Chi Minh denied the legitimacy of the latter) 
proclaiming the DRV as the "only legal government of the Vietnam people} " 
and was formally recognized by Peking and Mosco.r. 
On 29 January 1950) 
the French National Assembly approved legislation granting autonomy to 
the State of Vietnam. 
On February .1) 1950) Secretary of state Acheson 
made the following public statement: 
, 
"The recognition by the Kremlin of Ho Chi Minh's communist 
. movement in Indochina comes as a surprise. 
The Soviet acknmll-
edgment ' of this movement 'should remove any illusions as to the 
'nationalist' nature of Ho Chi Minhts aims and reveals Ho in 
his true colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in 
Indochina. 
"Alb hough timed in an effort to cloud the transfer of 
soverei~nty by France to the legal Governments of Laos) Cam-
bodia a~d Vietnam) we have every reason to believe that those 
I 
legal governments will proceed in their development toward 
stable governments representing the true nationalist senti-
ments df more than 20 million peoples of Indochina. 
"F)ench action in transferring sovereignty to Vietnam) 
Laos and Cambodia has been in process for same time. 
Fol-
Im-ringFrench ratification) which is expected within a few 
days) ·the way will be open for recognition of these legal 
A-7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
governments by the countries of the world whose policies 
support the development of genuine national independence in 
former colonial areas ..•• " 
Formal French ratification of Vietnamese independence was announced on 
2 February 1950; on the same date) President Truman approved U.S. recog-
nition for Bao Dai. 
French requests for aid in Indochina followed within 
a few weeks . 
On May 8) 1950) the Secretary of State announced that: 
"The United States Government convinced that neither 
national independence nor democratic evolution exist in any 
area dominated by Soviet imperialism) considers the situation 
to be such as to .Tarrant its according economic aid and mili-
tary equipment to the Assoc i ated States of Indochina and to 
France in order to assist them in restoring stability and per-
mitting these states to pursue their peaceful and democratic 
development. " 
The U. S. thereafter 'vas deeply involved in the developing war . 
But 
'it cannot be said that the extension of aid was a volte-face of U.S. 
policy precipitated solely by the events of 1950. 
It appears rather as 
the denouement of a cohesive progression of U. S. policy decisions stem-
ming from the 1945 determination that France should decide the political 
future of Vietnamese nationalism. 
Neither the modest O. S.S. aid to the 
Viet Minh in 1945) nor t he U.S. refusal to abet French recourse to arms 
the same year) signaled U.S. backing of Ho Chi Minh. ' To the contrary) 
the U.S. was wary of Ho) apprehensive ' l est Paris 'imperialism be suc-
ceeded by control from Moscow. 
Uncertai nty characterized the U.S. 
attitude t oward Ho through 1948) but the U.S. incessantly pressured 
France to accommodate "genuine" Vietnamese nationalism and independence . 
In early 1950) both the apparent fruition of the Bao Dai solution) and 
the patent alignment of the DRV with the USSR and Communist China) Lmpelled 
the U.S. to more direct intervention in Vietnam . 
(Tab 3) 
LA. 
DISCUSSION 
Tab 1 - Indochina in U.S. Wartime Policy, 1941-1950 
2 - U.S. Neutrality i n the Franco-Viet Minh War, 1946-1949 
3 - Origins of the U.S. Involvement in Vietnam 
A-8 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I.A.1. 
J 
I.A.l 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
1. 
Indochina in U.S. Wartime Policy, 1941-1945 •••••. •• ••••.•••••• A-l0 
a. Roosevelt's Trusteeship Concept •••.•.•.•••.•••.•••.••••..• A-12 
(1) Military Strategy Pre-eminent ••.•••..•.•.•.••••...•.• A-14 
(2) 
Failure of the Trusteeship Proposal .•••••.•••••.••.•• A-19 
(3) Decision in Indochina Left to France •.••••.••••••..•. A-20 
b. 
Truman and the Occupation of Indochina, 1945' •......•..••.• A-20 
t 
A-9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
l 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I. A. 
U.S. POLICY, 1940-1950 
1. Indochina in U.S. Wartime Policy, 1941-1945 
In the interval between the fall of France in 1940, and the Pearl 
Harbor attack in December, 1941, the United States watched with increasing 
apprehension the flux of Japanese military power into Indochina. 
At first 
the United States urged Vichy to refuse J apanese requests for authoriza-
tion to use bases there, but was unable to offer more than vague assur-
ances of assistance, such as a State Department statement to the French 
Ambassador on 6 August 1940 that: 
"We have been. doing and are doing everything possible 'l-Tithin 
the framework of our established policies to keep the situation 
in the Far East stabilized; that we have been progressively 
taking various steps, the effect of which has been to exert 
economic pressure on Japan; that our Fleet is now based on Hawaii, 
and that the course which we have been following, as indicated 
above, gives a clear indication of our intentions and activities 
for the future. II * 
The French Ambassador replied that: 
"In his opinion the phrase fwithin the framework of our 
established policies,\ when associated with'the apparent reluc-
tance of the American Government to consider the use of mili-
tary force in the Far East at this particular time , to mean 
that the United States would not use military or naval force 
in support of any position vlhich might be taken to resist the 
J~anese attempted aggression on Indochina. 
The Ambassador 
Lfeareil that the French Government would, under the indicated 
pressure of the Japanese Government, be forced to accede ... II 
-)(-
! 
The fears of t~e French Ambassador \-Tere r ealized . 
In 1941, however, Japan 
went beyond the use of bases to demands for a presence in Indochina t anta-
mount to occupation. 
President Roosevelt himself expressed the heightening 
U.S. alarm to the Japanese Ambassador, in a conversation recorded by Acting 
Secretary of State Welles as follows: 
I 
I 
IfF,he President then went on to say that this new move by 
Japan I~n Indochina created an exceedingly serious problem for 
the Unlted States ... the cost of any military occupation is 
treme~dous and the occupation itself is not conducive to the 
* U.S. Department of State Memorandum from J. C. Dunn to Under Secretary 
of State Welles, 6 August 1940. 
TOP SEC.RET - Sensi ti ve 
A-IO 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
production by civilians in occupied countries of food supplies 
and :ra1-7 materials of the character required by Japan. 
Had Japan 
undertaken to obtain the supplies she required from Indochina 
in a peaceful ,vay, she not only would have obtained larger quanti-
ties of such supplies, but would have obtained them with complete 
security and without the draining expense of a military occupa-
tion. 
Furthermore, from the military standpoint, the President 
said, surely the Japanese Government could not have in r eality 
the slightest belief that China, Great Britain, the Netherlands 
or the United States had any territorial designs on Indochina 
nor were in the slightest degree providing any real threats of 
aggression against Japan . 
This Government, consequently, could 
only assume that the occupation of Indochina was being undertaken 
by Japan for the purpose of further offense and this created a 
situation 1-7hich necessarily must give the United States the most 
serious disquiet .. : 
" ... The President stated that if the Japanese Government 
would refrain from occupying Indochina 1-lith its military and naval 
forces, or, had such steps actually been commenced , if the Japanese 
Government would wi thdra'w such forces, the President could assure 
the Japanese Government that he would do everything vlithin his 
power to obtain from the Governments of China, Great Britain, 
the Netherlands, and of course the United States itself a bind-
ing and solemn declaration, provided Japan WOQld undertake the 
same commitment , to r egard Indochina as a neutralized country 
in the same way in which Switzerland had up to now been regarded 
by the powers as a neutralized country. 
He stated that this 
would imply that none of the powers concerned would undertake 
any military act of aggression against Indochina and would re-
main in control of the territory and would not be confronted with 
attempts to dislodge them on the part of de Gaullist or Free 
French agents or forces. 11 * 
The same date, Secretary of State Cordell Hull instructed Sumner Welles 
to see the Japanese Ambassador, and 
I . 
I1Make clear the fact that the occupation of Indochina by 
Japan possibly means one further important step to seizing con-
trol of the South Sea area, including trade routes of supreme 
importance to the United States controlling such products as 
rubber, tin and other commoditi es . 
This was of vital concern 
to the/ United States. 
The Secretary said that if we did not 
bring out this point our people will not understand the signi-
ficance "of this movement into Indochina. 
The Secretary menti oned 
anothe1r point to be stressed: 
there is no theory on which Indo-
china could be flooded with armed forces, aircraft, et cetera , 
* Memorandum of Conversation by Sumner Welles, Acting Secretary of State 
24 July, 1941; the President's proposal for neutralization was sUbmitt~d 
to Japan in a note of 8 August, 1941. 
A-ll 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
for the defense of Japan. 
The only alternative is that this 
venture into Indochina has a close relation to the South Sea 
area and its value for offense against that area." * 
In a press statement of 2 August 1941, Acting Secretary of State 
Welles deplored Japan's "expansionist aims" and impuned Vichy: 
"Under these circumstances, this Government i s impelled 
to question whether the French Government at Vichy in fact 
proposes to maintain its declared policy to preserve for 
the French people the territories both at home and abroad 
which have long been under French sovereignty . 
"This Government, mindful of its traditional friend-
ship for France, has deeply sympathized with the desire of 
the French people to maintain their territories and to 
preserve them intact. 
In its relations with the French 
Government at Vichy and vri th the local French authorities 
in French territories, the United States will be governed 
by the manifest effectiveness with which those authorities 
endeavor to protect these territories from domination and 
control by those pOVlers which are seeking to extend their 
rule by force and conquest, or by the threat thereof." 
On the eve of Pearl Harbor, as part of the U. S. attempt to obtain 
Japanese consent to a non-aggression pact, the U.S. again proposed neutrali-
zation of Indochina in return for Japanese withdrawal. 
The events of 
7 December 1941 put the question of the future of Indochina in the wholly 
different context of U.S. strategy for fighting World War II. 
a. 
Roosevelt's Trusteeship Conce-pt 
U. S. policy tOvrard Indochina during Horld Har II was ambivalent. 
On the one hand, the U.S. appeared to support Free French claims to all 
of France 's overseas dominions. 
The U.S. early in the war repeatedly ex-
pressed or implied.to the French an intention to restore to France its 
* Memorandum by Cecil W. Gray, Assistant to the Secretary of State, 
July 24, 1942. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A-12 
I 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
overseas empire after the war. 
These U.S. commitments included the 
August 2, 1941, official statement on the Franco-Japanese agreement; 
a December , 1941, Presidential letter to Petain; a March 2, 1942, 
statement on New Caledonia; a note to the French Ambassador of 
April 13, 1942; Presidential statements and messages at the time 
of the North Africa invasion; the Clark-Darlan Agreement of Novem-
ber 22, 1942; and a letter of the same month from the President's 
Personal Representative to General Henri Giraud, which included 
the following reassurance: 
1t ••• The restoration of France to full indepen-
dence, in ail the greatness and vastness vThich it 
possessed before the war in Europe as well as 
overseas , is one of the war aims of the United 
Nations. It is thoroughly understood that French 
sovereignty will be re-established as soon as 
possible throughout all the territory, metropoli-
tan or colonial, over which flevl the French flag 
in 1939." Y 
On the other hand,in the Atlantic Charter and other pronouncements 
the U. S. proclaimed support for national self-determins.tion and inde-
pendence . 
Moreover, the President of the United States, especially 
distress ed at the Vichy Itsell_out" to Japan i n Indochina, often cited 
French rule there as a flagrant example of onerous and expl oitative 
colonialism, and talked of his determination to t urn Indochina over 
to an interns.tional trusteeship after the war. 
In early 1944, Lord 
Halifax, the British Ambassador in Washington, called on Secretary 
of State Hull to i n<luire whether the President's Itrather definite" 
statements , l'that Indo-china should be taken alvay from the French and 
put under p'n international trusteeship" -- made to "Turks, Egyptians 
and perhaps others
lt during his trip to Cairo and Teheran -- repre-
s ented "final conclusions in view of the fact that they would soon 
get back to the French ..• " 51 
(The French marked well the Presi-
dent's views -- in fact as France vlithdrew from Vietnam in 1956, its 
Foreign Minister recalled Roosevelt's assuring the Sultan of Morocco 
that his sympathies lay with colonial peoples struggling for inde-
pendence. l/) 
Lord Halifax later recorded that: 
I 
I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A-13 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"The President was one -of the people who used conversation 
as others of us use a first draft on paper ... a method of trying 
out an idea. 
If it does not go 'Tell, you can modify it or drop 
it as you will. 
Nobody thinks anything of it if you do this 
with a paper draft; but if you do it with conversation, people 
say that you have changed your mind, that 'you never knew where 
you have him,' and so on." ~/ 
But in response to a memorandum from Secretary of State Hull putting 
the question of Indochina to F.D.R., and reminding the President of 
the numerous U.S. commitments to restoration of the French empire, 
Roosevelt replied (on January 24, 1944) that: 
"I sa"l Halifax last week and told him quite frankly that 
it Has perfectly true that I had, for over a year, expressed 
the opinion that Indo-China should not go back to France but 
that it should be administered by an international trusteeship. 
France has had the country -- thirty million inhabitants for 
nearly one hundred years, and the people are worse off than 
they "Tere at the beginning. 
"As a matter of interest, I am wholeheartedly supported in 
this view' by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and by Marshal Stalin. 
I see no reason to play in with the British Foreign Office in 
this matter. 
The only reason they seem to oppose it is that 
they fear the effect it would have on their ovrn possessions and 
those of the Dutch. 
They have never. liked the idea of trustee-
ship because it is, in some instances, aimed at future inde-
pendence. 
This is true in the case of Indo-China. 
"Each case must, of course, stand on its own feet, but the 
case of Indo-China is perfectly clear. 
France has milked it for 
one hundred years. 
The people of Indo-China are entitled to 
something better than that." '2../ 
(~) Military Strategy Pre-eminent 
Throughout the year 1944, the President held to his 
views, and consistent with them, proscribed U.S. aid to resistance 
groups -- including French groups -- in Indochina. 
But the war in the 
Asian theaters moved rapidly, and the center of gravity of the American 
effort began to shift north,yard to"rard Japan. 
The questi on of U.S. 
strategy in Southeast Asia then came to the fore. 
At the Second Quebec 
Conference (September, 1944), the UoS. refused British offers of naval 
assistance against J apan because Admiral King believed "the best occu-
pation for any available British forces would be to re-take Singapore, 
and to assist the Dutch in recovering the East Indies," and because he 
suspected that the offer "was perhaps not unconnected with a desire 
for United States help in clearing the Japanese out of the Malay States 
and Netherlands East Indies." §/ 
Admiral King's suspicj.ons were not 
A-14 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
well-founded, at least insofar as Churchill's strategic thought was con-
cerned. 
The Prime Minister was evidently as unwilling to invite an active 
American role in the liberation of Southeast Asia as the U.S. was to 
undertake same; as early as February, 1944, Churchill wrote that: 
"A decision to act as a subsidiary force under the 
Americans in the Pacific raises difficult political ques-
tions about the future of our Malayan possessions. If the 
Japanese should withdraw from them or make peace as the 
result of the main American thrust, the United States 
Government would after the victory feel greatly strengthened 
in its view that all possessions in the East Indian Archi-
pelago should be placed under some international body upon 
which the United States \'lOuld exercise a decisive concern." '11 
The future of Comro.onwealth territories in Southeast Asia stimulated 
intense British interest in American intentions for French colonies there. 
In November and December of 19Lf4, the British expressed to the United 
States , both in London and in Washington, their concern "that the United 
States apparently has not yet d-etermined upon its policy toward Indo-
china. It §) 
The head of the Far East ern Department in the British 
Foreign Office told the U.S. Ambassador that : 
"It would be difficult to deny French participation in the 
liberation of Indochina in light of the increasing strength of 
the French Government in world affairs, and that, unless a 
policy to be followed toward Indochina is mutually agreed be-
tween our two governments, circumstapces may arise at any 
moment which '-rill place our two governments in a very awkward 
situation." 2./ 
President Roosevelt, hOl·rever, refused to define his position further, 
notifying Secretary of State Stettinius on January 1, 1945: 
"I still do not vrant to get mixed up in any Indo-China 
decision. It is a matter for postwar.-- .•. I do not want to 
get mixed up in any military effort tOvrard the liberation of 
Indo-China from the Japanese.--You can tell Halifax that I 
made this very clear to Mr. Churchill. 
From both the military 
and civil point of vievr, action at this time is premature. "10/ 
However, the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff were concurrently planning 
the removal of American armed forces from Southeast Asia. 
In response 
to approaches from' French and Dutch officials requesting aid in expelling 
Japan from their former colonial territories, the U.S. informed them that: 
"All our available forces were committed to fighting 
the Japanese elsewhere in the Pacific, and Indochina and 
the East Indies were therefore not included within the 
sphere of interest of the American Chiefs of Staff." gj 
When the Combined Chiefs of Staff met at Malta at the end of January, 19Lf5, 
A-15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. American willingness to forego £urther operations in Southeast Asia 
led to a directive to Admiral Lord Mountbatten, Supreme Commander in 
that theatre, to liberate Malaya ,-rithout U.S. assistance. 12/ 
After 
the Yalta Conference (February, 1945), U.S. commanders in the Pacific 
,fere informed that the U.S. planned to turn over to the British respon-
sibility for operations in the Netherlands East Indies and NeF Guinea. 
The President, hmfever, agreed to permit such U.S. military operations 
in Indochina as avoided "alignments Fith the French, " and detraction 
from the U.S. military campaign against Japan. 13/ 
The latter stric-
ture precluded, in the U.S. vie\Ol, the U.S. cooperation \lith the French 
at Mountbatten's headquarters, or the furnishing of ships to carry Free 
French forces to Indochina to undertake its liberation. 
This U.S. 
position came under particularly severe French criticism after 11 March 
1945, when the Japanese overturned the Vichy regime in Vietnam, and 
prompted the Emperor Bao Dai to declare Vietnam unified and independent 
of France under Japanese protection. 
On 16 March 1945, a protest from 
General de Gaulle led to the follovling exchange bet'\'leen the Secretary 
of State and the President: 14/ 
DEPARTMENT OF STATE 
Washington 
-March 16, 1945 
~IEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESmENT 
Subject : 
Indo-China. 
Conwunications have been received from the Provisional 
Government of the French Republic asking for; 
(1) Assistance for the resistance groups no'\'l fighting 
the Japanese in Indo-China. 
(2) 
Conclusion of a civil affairs agreement covering 
possible future operations in Indo-China. 
These memoranda have been referred to the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff in order to obtain their vie'\'ls concerning the military 
aspects of t~e problems, and I shall communicate '\'lith you 
further on the subject upon receipt of the Joint Chiefs' reply. 
Attached here'\'lith is the text of a recent telegram from 
Ambassador Caffery describing his conversation '\'lith General 
de Gaulle on the subject of Indo-China. 
From this telegram and 
de Gaulle ' s speech of March 14, it appears that this Govermaent 
may be made. to appear responsible for the vTeakness of the 
A-16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
resistance to Japan in Indo-China. 
The British may likevTise 
be expected to encourage this vie'iv. 
It seems to me that with-
out prejudicing in any way our position regarding the future 
of Indo-China we can combat this trend by making public our 
desire to render such assistance as may be warranted by the 
circumstances and by the plans to 'ivhich we are already com-
mitted in the Pacific area. 
To this end I attach a draft of 
a suggested statement for publication, subject to your approval, 
by the State Department. 
Enclosures: 
1. 
Proposed Statement. 
2. 
Copy' of telegram 
from Ambassador Caffery 
LDot included her~7 
LEnclosure 1:7 
/s/ E. R. Stettinius) Jr. 
PROPOSED STATN~ENT 
The action of the Japanese Government in tearing avray the 
veil 'i'Tith which it for so long attempted to cloak its dominati"on 
of Indo-China is a direct consequence of the ever-mounting pres-
sure which our arms are applying to the Japanese Empire. 
It is 
a link in the chain of events whj.ch began so disastrously in the 
summer of 1941 vlith the Franco-Japanese agreement for the "common 
defense" of Indo-China. 
It is clear that this latest step in 
the Japanese program vTill in the long run prove to be of no avail. 
The Provisional Government of the French Republic has requested 
armed assistance for those 'ivho are resisting the Japanese forces 
t 
in Indo-China. 
In accordance ,-lith its constant desire to aid all 
those who' are vTilling to take up arms against our common enemies, 
this Government will do all it can to be of assistance in the 
present situation, consistent with plans to which it is already 
committed and vTith the operations nOvl taking place in the Pacific. 
It goes I-Tithout saying that all this country r s available resources 
are being devoted to the defeat of our enemies and they will con-
tinue to be employed in the manner best calculated to hasten 
their downfall. 
A-17 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
fj.espons:l.7 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
~OP SECEET - Sensitive 
THE WHITE HOUSE 
Washington 
March 17, 1945 
MEMORANDUM FOR 
The Secretary of State 
By. direction of the President, there is returned 
herewith Secretary of State Memorandum of 16 March, subject 
Indo-China, which includes a proposed statement on the 
Japanese action in Indo-China. 
The President is of the opinion that it is inad-
visable at the present time to issue the proposed statement. 
/s/ William D. Leahy 
The French were also actively pressuring the President and his key 
advisors through military channels. 
Admiral Leahy reported that, fol-
lowing Yalta: 
"The French representatives in Hashington resumed their 
fre~uent calls to my office after our return from the Crimea. 
They labeled most of their re~uests 'urgent .' They wanted to 
participate in the combined intelligence group th~n studying 
German industrial and scientific secretsj to exchange informa-
tion beti-lEien the Nner ican command in China and the French forces 
in Indo-Chinaj and to get agreement in principle to utilizing 
the French nayal and military forces in the war against Japan 
(the latter would assist in returning Indo-China to French 
control and give France a right to participate in lend-lease 
assistance after the defeat of Germany.) 
"Most of the time I could only tell them that I had no use-
ful information as to when and where we might make use of French 
assistance in the Pacific. 
"However, we did attempt to give a helping hand to the 
French resistance groups in Indo-.China. 
Vice Admiral Fenard 
called me on March 18 to say that planes from our 14th Air 
A-18 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Force in China were loaded with relief supplies for the 
undergrounders but could not start without authority from 
Washington. 
I immediately contacted General Handy and told 
him of the President's agreement that American aid to the 
Indo-China resistance groups might be given provided it 
involved no interference vlith our operations against Japan." 15/ 
(2) Failure of the Trusteeship Proposal 
In the meantime, the President's concept of postwar 
trusteeship status for dependent territories as an intermediate step 
tOI-i8rd. autonomy had undergone study by several interdepartmental and 
international groups, but had fared poorly. 
In deference to British 
sensibilities, the United States had originally sought only a declara-
tion from the colonial powers setting forth their intention to liberate 
their dependencies and to provide tutelage in self-government for sub-
j ect peoples. 
Such a declaration would have been consistent with the 
Atlantic Charter of 1941 in vrhich the U.S. and the U.K. jOintly agreed 
that, among the "common principles ... on vThich they base their hopes 
for a better future for the vlOrld," it I-TaS their policy that: 
" .•. they respect the right of all peoples to choose the 
fonn of government under which they will live; and they 
wish to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to 
those vTho have been forcibly deprived of them .... " 16/ 
In November, 1942, Secretary Hull submitted to the President a proposed 
draft US-UK declaration entitled "The Atlantic Charter and National 
Independence," ,{hich the President approved. 
Before this draft could 
be broached to the British, hOI-leVer, they submitted a counter-proposal, 
a statement emphasizing the responsbility of "parent" powers for 
developing native self-government, and avoiding endorsement of trustee-
ships. 
Subsequent Anglo-American discussions in March 1943 addressed 
both drafts, but foundered on Foreign Secretary Eden's opposition. 
Secretary Hull reported in his memoirs that Eden could not believe that 
the \-Tord "independence" 1tTould be interpreted to the satisfaction of all 
governments: 
" •.. the Foreign Secretary said that, to be perfectly frank, 
he had to say that he did not like our draft very much. 
He 
said it ivaS the \Yord 'independence' that troubled him, he had 
to thihk of the British Empire system, which was built on the 
basis bf Dominion and colonial status. 
I 
I 
"He pointed out that under the British Empire system there 
were v~rying degrees of self-govermnent, running from the 
Dominions through the colonial establishments which had in 
some c~ses , like Malta, completely self-government, to backward 
areas that were never likely to have their own government . 
He 
A-19 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
added that Australia ~d New Zealand also had colonial posses-
sions that they would be unw·illing to remove from their super-
visory jurisdiction." 17/ 
U.S. inability to work out a common policy with the U.K. also pre-
cluded meaningful discussion, let alone agreement, on the colonial issue 
at the Dumbarton Oaks Conversations in 1944. 18/ 
Through March, 1945, 
the issue was further occluded by debates within the U.S. Government 
over the postwar status of Pacific islands captured from the Japanese; 
in general, the War and Navy Departments advocated their retention under 
u.s. control · as military bases, w·hile State and other departments ad-
vocated an international trusteeship. 
(3) 
Decision on Indochina Left to France 
Secretary of State Stettinius, with the approval of 
President Roosevelt, issued a statement on April 3, 1945, declaring 
that, as a result of international discussions at Yalta on the concept 
of trusteeship, the United States felt that the postwar trusteeship 
structure: 
." ••. should be designed to permit the placing under it of 
the territories mandated after the last "rar, and such terri-
tories taken from the enemy in this war as might be agreed 
upon at a later date, and also such. other territories as might 
be voluntarily be placed under trusteeship.1t 19/ 
Indochina thus seemed relegated to French volition. 
Nonetheless, as of President Roosevelt's death on April 12, 1945, 
U.S. policy toward the colonial possessions of its allies, and tOvrard 
Indochina in particular, was in disarray: 
-- The British remained apprehensive that there might be a con-
tinued U.S. search for a trusteeship formula which might impinge on the 
Commonl'Te.alth. 
-- The French were restive over continued U.S. refusal to pro-
vide strategic transport for their forces, resentful over the paucity 
of U.S. support for French forces in Indochina, and deeply suspicious 
that the United States -- possibly in concert with the Chinese -- intended 
to block their re~aining control of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. 
b. 
Truman and the Occupation of Indochina, 1945 
Within a month of President Truman's entry into office, the 
French raised the subject of Indochina at the United Nations Conference 
.at San Francisco. 
Secretary of State Stettinius reported the following 
conversation to Washington: 
. 
" .•• Indo-China came up in a recent conversation I had with 
Bidault and Bonnet. 
The latter remarked that although the French 
A-20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Government interprets LUnder Secretary, of Stat~7 Welles' 
statement of 1942 concerning the restoratiofr of French 
sovereignty over the French Empire as including Indo-
China, the press continues to imply that a special status 
.Till be reserved for this colonial area. 
It was made quite 
clear to Bidault that the record is entirely innocent of 
any official statement of this government questioning, even 
by implication, French sovereignty over Indo-China. 
Certain 
elements of American public opinion, hmvever, condemned 
French governmental policies and practices in Indo-China. 
Bidault seemed relieved and has no doubt cabled Paris that 
he received reneived assurances of our recognition of French 
sovereignty over that area." 20/ 
In early June 19~' 5, the Department of State instructed the United 
States Ambassador to China on the deliberations in progress '\vithin the 
,U.S. Government and its discussions with allies on U.S. policy toward 
Indochina . 
He was informed that at San Francisco: 
, " •.. the American delegation has insisted upon the neces-
sity of providing for a progressive measure of self-govern-
ment for all dependent peoples looking toward their eventual 
independence or incorporation in some form of federation 
according to circumstances and the ability of the peoples 
to assume these responsibilities. 
Such decisions would 
preclude the establishment of a trusteeship in Indochina 
except ",ith the consent of the French Government. 
The latter 
seems unlikely. 
Nevertheless it is the President's intention 
at some appropriate time to ask that the French Government 
give some positive indication of its intentions in regard to 
the establishment of civil liberties and increasing measures 
of self-government in Indochina before formulating further 
declarations of policy in this respect." :?J! 
The United Nations Charter (June 26, 1945) contained a "Declaration'" 
Regarding Non-Self-Governing Territori es": 
Article 73 
"Members of the United Nations 'I-lhich have or assume respon-
sibiltties for the administration of territories whose peoples 
have not yet ,attained a full measure of self-government , recog-
nize the principle that the interests of the inhabitants of 
these territories are paramount, and accept as a sacred trust 
the obligation to promote to the utmost, within the system of 
international peace and security established by the present 
Charter, the 'Ivell-being of the inhabitants of these terri-
tories, and, to this end : 
A-21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
: "a. 
to ensure, with due respect for the culture of 
the peoples concerned, their political, economic, social, 
and educational advancement, their just treatment, and 
their protection against abuses; 
"b. 
to develop self-government, to take due account 
of the political aspirations of the peoples, and to assist 
them in the progressive development of their free political 
institutions, according to the particular circmastances 
of each territory and its peoples and their varying stages 
of advancement; ..• " 22/ 
Again, hOI-leVer, military considerations governed U.S. policy in 
Indochina. 
President Trmaan replied to General de Gaulle's repeated 
offers for aid in Indochina ylith statements to the effect that it yTaS 
his policy to leave such matters to his military commanders. 
At the 
Potsdam Conference (July, 1945), the Combined Chiefs of Staff decided 
that Indochina south of latitude 160 North was to be included in the 
Southeast Asia Command under Admiral Mountbatten. 23/ 
Based on this 
de'cision, instructions were issued that Japanese fOrces located north 
of that line would surrender to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, and 
those to the south to Admiral Lord Mountbatten; pursuant to these 
instructions, Chinese forces entered Tonkin in September, 1945, while 
a small British task force landed at Saigon. Political difficulties 
materialized almost immediately, for ,.,rhile the Chinese were prepared to 
accept the Vietnamese government they found in power in Hanoi, the 
British refused to do likevrise in Saigon, and deferred to the French 
there from the outset. 
There is no evidence that serious concern developed in Hashington 
at the s,.,riftly unfolding events in Indochina. 
In mid-August, Vietnamese 
resistance forces of the Viet Minh, under Ho Chi Minh, had seized power 
in Hanoi and shortly thereafter demanded and received the abdication of 
the Japanese puppet, Emperor Bao Dai. 
On V-J Day, September 2nd, Ho Chi 
Minh, had proc1aimed in Hanoi the establishment of the Democratic Repub-
lic of Vietnam (DRV). 
The DRV ruled as the only civil government in 
all of Vietnam for a period of about 20 days. 
On 23 September 1945, 
with the knowledge of the British Commander in Saigon, French forces 
.overthrew the local DRV government, and declared French authority re-
stored in Cochinchina . 
Guerrilla war began arolmd Saigon. 
Although 
American OSS representatives vrere present in both Hanoi and Saigon and 
ostensibly supported the Viet Minh, the United States took no official 
position regarding either the DRV, or the French and British actions in 
South Vietnam. 24/ 
In October, 1945, the United States stated its 
policy in the following terms: 
. "US has no thought of opposing the reestablishment of 
French control in Indochina and no official statement by US 
GOVT has questioned even by implication French sovereignty 
A-22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
over Indochina. 
HOIvever , it is not the policy of this GOVT 
to assist the French to reestablish their control over Indo-
china by force and the willingness of the US to see French 
control reestablished assumes that French claim to have the 
support of the population of Indochina is borne out by future 
event s ." 21 
French statements to the U.S. looked for an early end to the 
hostilities, and spoke reassuringly of reforms and liberality. 
In 
Novembe~ Jean Chauvel, Secretary-General to the French Minister for 
Foreign Affairs, told the U.S. Ambassador that: 
"When the trouble 1-lith the Annamites broke out de Gaulle 
had been urged by the French Mission in India to make some 
sort of policy statement announcing France's intention to 
adopt a far-reachll1g progressive policy designed to give the 
native population much greater authority, responsibility and 
representation in govt. 
De Gaulle considered the idea but 
rejected it because in the state of disorder prevailing in 
Indochina he believed that no such policy could be imple-
mented pending restoration of French authority and would 
therefore just be considered by everyone as 'merely more fine 
words.' 
Furthermore de Gaulle and the Foreign Minister 
believe that the present situation i s still so confused and 
they have so little i nformation rea,lly reliable on the overall 
Indochina picture that such plans and thoughts as they held 
heretofore may have to be very thoroughly revised in the light 
of recent developments. 
"Despite the fact that the French do not feel that they 
can as yet make any general statements outlining specific 
future plans f or Indochina, Chauvel says that they hope 'very 
soon' .to put into operation in certain areas programs including 
local elections which ,viII be designed to grant much greater 
t 
authority and greater voice in affairs to the natives. 
This 
he said would be a much better indication of the sincerity of 
French intentions than any policy statement ..•. The French hope 
soon to negotiate an agreement \-lith (the King of Cambodia7 
which \-Till result in the granting of-much greater responsibility 
and authority to the Cambodi ans . 
He mentioned specifically 
that there ,wuld be many more natives integrated into the local 
administrativ'e services and it was 'also hoped that local elec-
tions could soon be held. 
The French he said intend to follow 
the same procedure in Laos \-lhen the situation permits and eventu-
ally also in Annam and Tonkin. 
When order is restored throughout 
Indochina and agreements have been reached \{ith the individual 
states Chauvel said the French intend to embody the results of 
these separate agreements into a general program for all of 
Indochina." 26/ 
A-23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
From the autumn of 1945 through'the autumn of 1946, the United 
States received a series of ·communications from Ho Chi Minh depicting 
calamitous conditions in Vietnam, invoking the principles proclaimed 
in the Atlantic Charter and in the Charter of the United Nations, 
and pleading for U.S. recognrciu1 of the independence of the DRV, or __ 
as a last resort -- trusteeship for Vietnam under the United Nations. 
But while the U!S. took no action on Ho's requests, it was also unwilling 
to aid the French. 
On January 15, 1946, the Secretary of War was 
advised by the Department of State that it was contrary to U.S. policy 
to "employ American flag vessels or aircraft to transport troops of 
any nationality to or from the Netherlands East Indies or French Indo-
china, nor to permit use of such craft to carry arms, ammunition or 
military equipment to these areas." 27/ 
However, the British arranged 
for the transport of additional French troops to Indochina, bilaterally 
agreed "lith the French for the latter to assume British occupation 
responsibilities, and signed a pact on 9 October, 1945, giving "full 
recognition to French rights" in Indochina. 28/ 
French troops began 
arriving in Saigon that month, and subsequently the British turned 
over to them some 800 U.S. Lend-Lease jeeps and trucks. 
President 
Truman approved the latter transaction on the grounds that removing the 
equipment would be impracticable. 29/ 
The fighting behleen the French and the Vietnamese which began in 
South Vietnam with the 23 September, 1945, French coup d'etat, spread 
from Saigon throughout Cochinchina, and to southern Annam. 
By the end 
of January, 1946, it was wholly a Frencn affair, for by that time the 
British "\{ithdrm181 was complete; on 4 March, 1946, Admiral Lord Mountbatten 
deactivated Indochina as territory under the Allied Southeast Asia Com-
mand, thereby transferring all control to French authorities. 30/ From 
French headquarters, via Radio Saigon, came announcements that-a military 
"mopping-up" campaign ,0J8S in progress, but pacification ,vas virtually 
complete; but these reports of success were typically interspersed vlith 
such items as the following: 
"Rebel bands are still (wreaking destruction) in the areas 
south of Saigon. 
These bands are quite large, some numbering 
as many as 1,000 men. 
Concentrations of these bands are to be 
found ••. in the villages. 
Some have turned north in an attempt 
to disrupt (communications) in the Camau Peninsula, northeast 
of Batri and in the general area south of (Nha Trang). 
In the 
area south of Cholon and in the north of the Plaine des Jones 
region, several bands have taken refuge .... " 
"21 March 1946: 
"The follmring communique lvaS issued by the High Commissioner 
for Indochina this morning: 
'Rebel activities have increased in 
A-24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the Bien Hoa area) on both banks of the river Dong Nai. 
A 
French convoy has been attacked on the road between Bien Hoa 
and Tan Uyen where a land mine had been laid by the rebels . 
. 'In the (Baclo ) area) northwest of Saigon) a number of 
pirates have been captured in the course of a clean-up raid. 
Among the captured men are five J apanese deserters. 
The dead 
bodies of three Japanese) including an officer) have been 
found at the point Iolhere the operation ioTas carried out. 
'A French detachment was ambushed at (San Jay)) south 
Annam. 
The detachment) nevertheless) succeeded in carrying 
out its mission. 
Several aggressions by rebel parties are 
reported along the coastal road. 111 31/ 
ViOlence abated in South Vietnam somewhat as Franco-DRV negotia-
tions proceeded in spring) 1946) but in the meantime) French forces 
moved into further confrontation with Vietnamese IIrebels ll in Tonkin. 
In February) 1946) a French task force prepared to force landings at 
Haiphong) but was forestalled by diplomatic maneuver. 
A Franco-
. 
Chinese agreement of 28 February 1946 provided that the Chinese would 
turn over their responsibilities in northern Indochina to the French 
on 31 March 19Lf6. 32/ . 
On March 6) 1946) a French-DRV accord was reached in the follm-ring 
terms: 33/ 
Ill. 
The French Government recognizes the Vietnamese 
Republic as a Free State having its mVD Government) its 
own Parliament) its mm Army and its OIVD Finances) forming 
part of the Indochinese Federation and of the French Union. 
In that which concerns the reuniting of the three IIAnnamite 
Regions ll LCochinchina) Annam) TonkiE,7 the French Government 
pledges itself to ratify the decisions taken by the populations 
consulted by referendum. 
112. 
The Vietnamese Government declares itself ready to 
welcome amicably the French Army when) conforming to inter-
national agreements) it relieves the Chinese Troops. 
A 
Supplementary Accord) attached to the present Preliminary 
Agreement) will establish the means by which the relief 
operations will be carried out. 
113. 
The stipulations formulated above will immediately 
enter into forc e . 
Immediately after the exchange of Signatures) 
each of the High Contracting Parties will take all measures 
necessary to stop hostilities in the field) to maintain the 
troops in their respective positions) and to create the favor-
able atmosphere necessary to the immediate opening of friendly 
A-25 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and sincere negotiations. 
Thepe negotiations will deal par-
ticularly with: 
a. 
diplomatic r elations of Viet-nam with Foreign States 
b 0 
the future law of Indochina 
c. 
French interests, economic and cultural, in Viet-nam. 
Hanoi, Saigon or Paris may be chosen as the seat of the conference. 
Signed: 
and 
Ho-chi Minh 
Vu Hong Khanh 
DONE AT HANOI, the 6th of March 1946 
Signed: 
Sa.inteny 
French forces quickly exercised their prerogative, occupying Hanoi on 
18 March 1946, and negotiations opened in Dalat in April. 34/ 
Hence, as of April 10, 1946, allied occupation in Indochina was 
officially over, and French forces were positioned in all of Vietnam ' s 
major cities; the prob,lems of U. S. policy tm-rard Vietnam then shifted 
from the context of wartime strategy to the arena of the U.S. relation-
ship with France. 35/ 
A-26 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I 
I.A.2. 
LA.2 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
2. 
U.S. Neutrality in the Franco-Viet Minh War, 1946-1949 .••.•.•. .A-28 
a. Failures.of Negotiated Settlement .••.••..•••••.••.•.•••..• .A-28 
b. 
U.S. Policy Toward the Conflict; 1947-1949 ••.•••.••••••.••. A-42 
./ 
A-27 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
2. U.S. Neutrality in the Franco-Viet Minh War, 1946-1949 
a. 
Failures of Negotiated Settlement 
The return of the French to Tonkin in March, 1946, created 
an explosive situation. 
North Vietnam, a traditionally rice-deficit 
area, had experienced an extraordinarily bad harvest in 1945. 
Severe 
famine was scarcely helped by the concentrat~on of armies in the Red 
River Delta -- Vietnamese irregular forces, the most numerous belonging 
to the Viet Minh; some 150,000 Chinese; and then the French Expedition-
ary Corps . 
The people were not only hungry, but politically restive; 
the popular appetite for national independence had been thoroughly 
whetted by the Viet Minh and the formation of the DRV. 
While feeling 
against all foreign occupiers ran high, the French remained the primary 
target of enmity. 
But the March 6 Accord deferred a reckoning, serving 
to mollify extremists in Tonkin, and to dampen guerrilla operations in 
South Vietnam. 
The accord in any event underwrote peaceful cooperation 
bet,veen France and the DRV in North Vietnam for eight months. 
Yet the March 6 accord constituted an admission of defeat 
for Ho Chi Minh, because his policy had been directed toward inter-
nationalizing the Indochina problem. 
Ho made repeated overtures to 
the United States, to the United Nations, and to China, the USSR, and 
the U.K. 36/ 
His letters presented eloquent appeals for U.S. or U.N. 
intervention in Vietnam on the grounds of the principles embodied in 
the Atlantic Charter, the UoN. Charter, and on humanitarian groundso 
The l ast such to be forw·arded to the U. S. prior to the Accord of 
6 March 1946, is summarized in the follo ""l-ring telegram from an American 
diplomat in Hanoi, received in "\fashington 27 February 19~6: 
"Ho Chi Minh handed m~ 2 letters addressed to President 
of USA, China , Russia, and Britain identical copies of which 
I 
were stated to have been forwarded to other governments named. 
In 2 letters to Ho Chi Minh request LSi~7 USA as one of United 
Nations to su~port idea of Annamese independence according to 
Philippines Lsiii' example, to exarnine the case of the Annamese , 
A-28 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and to take steps necessary to maintenance of world peace 
which is being endangered by French efforts to reconquer 
Indochina. 
He asserts that Annamese will fight until 
United Nations interfere in support of Annamese indepen-
dence. 
The petition addressed to major United Nations 
contains: 
"A. 
Revie1tl of French relations with Japanese where 
French Indochina allegedly aided Japs: 
"B. 
Statement of establishment on 2 September 1945 
of PENW LSi~ Democratic Republic of Viet Minh: 
"C. 
Summary of French conquest of Cochin China begun 
23 Sept 1945 and still incomplete: 
"D. 
Outline of accomplishments of Annamese Government 
in Tonkin including popular elections, abolition of un-
desirable taxes, expansion of education and resumption as 
far as possible of normal economic activities: 
"E. 
Request to 4 powers: 
(1) To intervene and stop 
the war in Indochina in order to mediate fair settlement 
and (2) to bring the Indochinese issue before the United 
Nations organization. 
The petition ends vTith statement 
that Annamese ask for full independence in fact and that 
in interim while aW'aiting UNO decision the Annamese will 
continue to fight the reestablishment of French imperial-
ism. 
Letters and petition will be transmitted to Depart-
ment soonest." 37/ 
There is no record that the U.S. encouraged Ho Chi Minh thus to submit 
his cause to the U.S., beyond the O.S.S. support he received during 
and immediately after World War II; nor does the record reflect that 
the U.S. responded affirmatively to Ho's petitions. Rather, the U.S. 
_ Government appears to have adhered uniformly to a policy of looking 
to the French rather than to Vietnamese Nationalists for constructive 
steps tmvard Vietnamese independence. 
On 5 December, 1:;46, after the 
November incidents, but before the fighting broke out in earnest, State 
instructed the U.S. diplomatic representative in Hanoi as follows: 38/ 
A-29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"Assume you will see Ho in Hanoi and offer following 
summary our present thinking as guide. 
"Keep in mind Ho's clear record as agent international 
communism" absence evidence recantation Moscmr affilia-
tions" confused political situation France and support Ho 
receiving French Communist Party. 
Least desirable eventu-
ality yTould be establisbment Communist-dominated Moscow-
oriented state Indochina in vie.v DEPT) which most interested 
INFO strength non-communist elements Vietnam. 
Report fully" 
repeating or requesting DEPT repeat Paris. 
flRecent occurrences Tonkin cause deep concern. 
Consider 
March 6 accord and modus vivendi as result peacefui negoti-
ation provide basis settlement outstandj.ng questions betveen 
France and Vietnam and impose responsibility both sides not 
prejudice future" particularly forthcoming Fontainebleau 
Conference" by resort force. 
Unsettled situation such as 
pertains certain to offer provocations both sides" but for 
this reason conciliatory patient attitude especially necessary. 
Intransigence either side and disposition exploit incidents 
can only retard economic rehabilitation Indochina and cause 
indefinite postponement conditions cooperation France and 
Vietnam Ylh~ch both agree essential. 
"If Ho takes stand non-implementation promise by French 
of Cochinchina referendum relieves Vietnam responsibility 
compliance with agreements) you might if you consider advis-
able raise question whether he believes referendum after 
such long disorder could produce worthwhile result and whether 
he considers compromise on status Cochinchina could possibly 
be reached thrQugh negotiation. 
"May say .American people have welcomed attainments Indo-
chinese in efforts realize praiseworthy aspirations greater 
autonomy in frameYTork democratic institutions and it would be 
regrettable should this interest and sympathy be imperilled 
by any tendency Vietnam administration force issues by intransi-
gence and violence. 
"May inform Ho /U.S. Ambassador Paris7 discussing situation 
French similar frankness. 
For your INFO; [Foreign Offic:=.7 in 
DEC 3 conversation stated (1) no question reconquest Indochina 
as such ylOuld be counter French public opinion and probably 
beyond French military resources) (2) French will continue 
base policy March 6 accord and modus vivendi and make every 
effort apply them through negotiation Vietnam) (3) French would 
resort forceful measures only on restricted scale in case 
flagrant violation agreements Vietnam) (4) d'Argenlieu's use-
fulness impaired by outspoken dislike Vietnam officials and 
A-30 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
replacement perhaps desirable, (5) French Communists embar-
rassed in pose as guardian French international interests 
by barrage telegraphic appeals from Vietnam. 
/Ambassador7 
.. Till express gratification this statement French policy with 
observation implementation such policy should go far obviate 
any danger that (1) Vietnamese irreconcilables and extremists 
might be in position make capital of situation (2) Vietnamese 
might be turned irrevocably against West and tm18rd ideologies 
and affiliations hostile democracies vrhich could result per-
petual foment Indochina with consequences all Southeast Asia. 
"Avoid impression US Govt making formal intervention this 
juncture. Publicity any kind would be unfortunate. 
"Paris be guided foregoing. 
"Acheson, Acting.
1I 
For a while) the French seemed genuinely interested in pursuing 
a policy based on the March 6 Accord and the modus vivendi, and in 
avoiding a test of arms vlith the DRV. 
If there were contrary utterances 
from some) such as Admiral d'Argenlieu, the High Commissioner of Indo-
China, -- vlho 'recorded his "amazement that France has such a fine 
expeditionary corps in Indochina and yet its leaders prefer to nego-
tiate rather than to fight .... " -- there were many such as General 
Leclerc, who had led French forces into Hanoi on 18 March 1946, and 
promptly called on Ho Chi Minh, announcing every intent~on of honoring 
the March 6 Accord. 
"At the present time," he said, "there is no ques-
tion of imposing ourselves by force on masses vTho desire evolution and 
innovat ion." 39/ The French Socialist Party -- the dominant political 
party in France -- consistently advocated conciliation during 1946. 
In 
December, 1946) even after the armed incidents in November between 
French and DRV armed forces in North Vietnam, Leon Blum -- who had 
become Premier of France) at the head of an all-Socialist Cabinet . 
wrote that France had no alternative save to grant the Vietnamese inde-
I 
pendence: 
"There is one .ray and only one of preserving in Indochina . 
the prestige of our civilization, our political and spiritual 
influence, and also those of our material interests which are 
legit~ate: .it is sincere agreement LWith Viet Na~7 on the 
basis of independence .•.• " 40/ 
I 
-
The Communists, the other major Leftist party in France, were also vocally 
conciliatoryj but) expectant of controlling the government, if not alone 
at least aSI part of a coalition, they tended to be more careful than the 
Socialists of their ability to sway nationalist sentiment. 
In July of 
1946) L'Humknite, the Communist nevlSpaper, had emphasized that the Party 
A-31 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
did not vTish France to be reduced to "its ovm small metropolitan terri-
tory," but warned that such would be the consequence if the colonial 
peoples turned against France: 
"Are '.Te, after having lost Syria and Lebanon yesterday, 
to lose Indochina tomorrol>l, North Africa the day after?" 41/ 
In the National Assembly in September, 1946, a Communist deputy had 
declared that: 
. "The Communists are as much as the next person for the 
greatness of the country. 
But •.. they have never ceased to 
affirm that the French Union ... can only be founded on the 
confident, fraternal, and above all, democratic collaboration 
of all the peoples' and races who compose it ••.• " 42/ 
However, Ho Chi Minh ivas unable to capitalize upon his connection with 
the French Left (Ho had been one of the found].ng members of the French 
Communist Party in the early 1920's) to turn the expressed convictions 
of either the Socialists or the Communists to the advantage of the DRV. 
The Communists were not prepared to press the case for the Vietnamese 
at the cost of votes in France. 
The Socialists in power paid only lip 
service to conciliation, and allowed the more militant colonialists, 
especially those in Vietnam, to set France's policy in Indochina; thus, 
A&niral d'Argenlieu, not General Leclerc, spoke for the French Govern-
ment. 
In mid-December, 1946, as soon as Blum took officeJ Ho sent him 
a telegram with proposals for easing tension in Vietnam, but the message 
did not reach Paris until December 26. 43/ 
By that time the flash-
point had been passed. 
In Hanoi, on 19December 19L~6, Vietnamese troops, 
after several days of mounting animosity punctuated with violence, cut 
off the city's water and electricity, and attacked French posts using 
small arms, mortar and artillery. 
The issue of who was the aggressor 
has never been resolved. 
The fighting flared across North Vietnam, and 
two days later, the guerrilla '.rar in South Vietnam quickened pace. 
The 
French responded to the initial attacks with an occasional savagery which 
rendered increasingly remote restoration of status quo ante. 
On 23 December 1946, Premier Leon Blum addressed the National Assem-
bly on the IIndochina crisis. 
His speech was characteristically principled, 
and characueristically ambiguous: 
he talked peace, but endorsed mili-
. 
tant French officials in Vietnam. 
Although he declared that, "The old 
colonial system founded on conquest and maintained by constraint, which 
tended tOvlard exploitation of conquered lands and peoples is finished 
today," he 'also stated that: 
I 
"ife have been obliged to deal with violence. 
I declare 
that the men who are fighting out there, the French of Indochina, 
A-32 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the friendly populations, may count unreservedly on the vigi-
lance and resolution of the government. 
"It was our common task to try everything to spare the 
blood of our children -- and also the blood that is not ours, 
but 'lhich is blood all the same) that of a people whose right 
to political liberty we recognized ten months ago) and who 
should keep their place in the union of peoples federated 
around France ..•. 
"Before all, order must be reestablished) peaceful order 
which is necessarily the basis for the execution of contracts." 41~/ 
Premier Blum was succeeded within a week of his speech by the first 
government of the Fourth Republic under Paul Ramadier. 
France sent three 
emissaries to Vietnam at this juncture: 
Admiral d'Argenlieu, General 
Leclerc, and the Socialist Minister of Overseas France, Marius Moutet. 
Admiral d'Argenlieu became the High Comrnissioner of Indochina, and 
a~cused the Vietnamese of breaking faith with France. 
He stated emphat-
ically that France intended to preserve in Indochina: 
. " ••• the maintenance and development of its present influ-
ence and of its economic interests, the protection of ethnic 
minorities with which it is entrusted, the care of assuring 
the security of strategic bases within the framework of defense 
of the Fede~ation and the French Union .•.. . 
"France does not intend in the present state o:f. evolution 
of the Indochinese people to give them unconditional and total 
independence, -.rhich would only be a fiction gravely prejudicial 
to the interests of the two parties." 45/ 
The other t,W representatives of France were dispatched on fact-
finding missions. 
Their reports contained diametrically opposing policy 
recommendations. 
General Leclerc wrote: 
"In 1947 France will no longer put dm'Tn by force a group-
ing of 24)000,000 inhabitants which is assuming unity and in 
which there exists a xenophobic and perhaps a national ideal •..• 
"The capital problem from now on is political. It is a 
question of coming to terms with an awakening xenophobic 
nationalism, channeling it in order to safeguard, at least in 
part, the rights of France." 46/ 
The General had been sent to examine the military Situation, and 
returned recommending a political solution. 
The Socialist Marius Moutet 
had been sent to inquire into the political prospects, and returned ",ith 
the conclusion that only a military solution was promising. 
Like 
A-33 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Admiral d'Argenlieu) Moutet believed that there could be no negotia-
tions with Ho Chi Minh. 
He vrote of the "cruel disillusionment of 
agreements that could not be put into effect ... ," and he declared that: 
. "We can no longer speak of a free agreement between 
France and Vietnam .... 
"Before any negotiations today) it is necessary to have 
a military decision. 
I am sorry) but one cannot commit such 
madness as the Vietnamese have done with impunity." 47/ 
It was the politician's ideas, rather than the general's) which 
prevailed in Paris. Premier Ramadier -- himself a Socialist -- spoke 
of peace in Vietnam, and announced that his government favored inde-
pendence and unity for Vietnam: 
!' Independence within the French Union ;and7 union of the 
three Annamese countries) if the Annamese people desire it." 48/ 
At the same time) however, his government permitted Admiral d'Argenlieu 
to launch a military campaign of major proportions and punitive intent. 
Very early in the ,.,ar) the French raised the spectre of Communist 
conspiracy in Vietnam. 
Admiral d'Argenlieu in Saigon called for an 
internationally concerted policy to array the Western powers against 
the expansion of . communism in ASia, beginning ,dth Vietnam. 
In the 
National Assembly debated in March, 1947) a Rightist deputy introduced 
the charge that the violence in Vietnam had been directed from Moscow: 
"Nationalism in Indochina is a means, the end is Soviet 
imperialism." 49/ 
Neither the government nor the people of France heeded General Leclerc's 
statement of January) 1947: 
_ 
"Anti-communism will be a useless tool as long as the 
problem of nationalism remains unsolved." 50/ 
Ho Chi Minh, for his part, issued repeated appeals to France for 
peace, even offering to withdral'T personally: 
"When France recognizes the independence and unity of Viet-
nam) we will retire to our village) for we are not ambitious 
for power or honor." 51/ 
In February) 1947) the French offered terms to Ho tantamount to uncon-
ditional surrender. 
Ho flatly rejected these, asking the French repre-
sentative) "If you were in my place) vTOuld you accept them? ... In the 
French Union there is no place for covrards. 
If I accepted these condi-
tions I should be one." 52/ 
On 1 March 1947, Ho appealed publicly to 
A-34 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the French government and the Fxench.people: 
"Once again, 1ve declare solemnly that the Vietnamese 
people desire only unity and independence in the French 
Union, and we pledge ourselves to respect French economic 
and cultural interests •... If France would but say the '-lOrd 
to cease hostility immediately, so many lives and so much 
property would be saved and friendship and confidence would 
be regained. II 53/ 
But the French displayed little interest in negotiations. 
Premier 
Ramadier stated in March, 
191~ 7, that: 
IIWe must protect the life and possessions of Frenchmen, 
of foreigners, of our Indochinese friends who have confidence 
in French liberty. 
It is necessary that we disengage our garri-
sons, re-establish essential communications, assure the safety 
of populations ,.,rhich have taken refuge with us. 
That we have 
done. II 54/ 
Ramadier and his ministers spoke repeatedly in the spring of 1947 of an 
imminent end to the IImilitary phase
ll of the crisis, and of the beginning 
of a IIconstructive phase, II in which presumably economic and political 
assistance vlOuld supplant the military instrumentj but in what was to 
become a pattern of expectation and frustration, the Fourth Republic 
discoyered that its military forces were incapable of controlling even 
the principal lines of communication in Vietnam) and that the military 
solution severely taxed the full resources of the French Union. 
In 
March, 1947 an additional division of troops for the French Expeditionary 
Corps) dispatched to Vietnam per General Leclerc's recommendation, had 
to be diverted en route to quell an insurgency in Madagascar. 
By the summer of 1947, the French Government was avrare that the 
situation in Indochina was at an liupasse. 
Having failed in its attempt 
to force a military decision; it turned to a political solution, as 
suggested by General Leclerc. 
But again the ideas of Admiral d'Argenlieu 
weighed heavily. 
In January, 1947, d'Argenlieu wrote that: 
IIIf we examine the problem basically, we are led to inquire 
whether the political form unquestionably capable of benefiting 
from the political prestige of legitimacy is not the traditional 
'monarchic institution, the very one that existed before the 
Japanese surrender .... The return of the Emperor /Bao Dai7 would 
probably reassure all those who, having opposed the Viet Minh) 
fear they will be accused of treason. II 55/ 
. 
It was with Bao Dai, not Ho Chi Minh, that the French elected to nego-
tiate for a political settlement with Vietnamese Nationalists. 
A-35 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
French emissaries approached Bao Dai with terms not unlike those 
Ho Chi Minh had negotiated on 6 Marc~ 1946: 
unity and independence 
within the French Union, provided Bao Dai formed a government which 
would furnish a clear alternative to Ho Chi Minh's DRV. 
With French 
encouragement, a group of Vietnamese Nationalists formed a political 
party advocating the installation of Bao Dai at the head of a non-
Viet Minh Vietnamese regime. 
Bao Dai was at first evasive and skep-
tical, but was eventually convinced that the French situation in 
Indochina was sufficiently desperate that they would have to honor 
commitments they made to him. 
Bao Dai also seems to have believed 
that he could attract American support and material aid -- a view 
which may have stemmed in part from a 1947 Life magazine article by 
William C. Bull itt , the influential former U.S. Ambassador to France, 
endorsing Bao Dai as a solution to France's dilemma. 56/ 
France then proceeded to contract with Bao Dai a series of agree-
ments, each of vlhich ostensibly brought Bao Dai closer to genuine 
autonomy for Vietnam. 
It was not, however, until February, 1950, that 
the French National Assembly acceded to political independence and 
unification for Vietnam. 
Chronicled below are the principal steps by 
which France failed on the one hand to reach an accommodation with 
Ho Chi Minh, and on the other hand erected the "Bao Dai solution" in 
its stead. 57/ 
A-36 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
) 
Event 
Accord of 
6 March 1946 
First Dal at 
Copference , 
19 April -
11 May 1946 
i 
Establishment of 
Provisional 
Government of 
Cochinchina, 
1 June 1946 · 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
PRINCIPAL EVENTS 
FRANCE - VIETNAM RELATIONS 
1946 - 1950 
Description 
Agreement signed by Ho Chi Minh 
with French provides that: 
1. 
France recognizes DRV as: 
"Free State .•. forming 
part of the Indochina 
. Federation and the 
French Union." 
2. 
DRV welcomes French Army 
into Tonkin for 5 years • 
. 
3. 
Further negotiations to 
spell out details for 
DRV independence. 
French and DRV delegates attempt 
to negotiate differences, but 
are able to enact only minor 
agreements on cultural and 
educational matters. 
French announce formation of 
an independent Cochinchina yri th-
in the Indochina Federation and 
the French Union. 
Outcome 
1. 
Led to French 
occupation of 
Tonkin Delta. 
2. 
No significant 
step taken by 
France tovrard 
DRV autonomy. 
1. 
Overshadovled by 
continuing 
guerr illa war 
in Cochinchina. 
2. 
A commission '\-ras 
set up to arrange 
an armistice; 
futile. 
1. Touched off new 
wave of guerrilla 
war in South 
Vietnam. 
2. Possibility of 
divided Vietnam 
pressured DRV in 
negotiations with 
France; stiffened 
DRV attitudes. 
A-37 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Event 
Fontainbleau 
Conference, 
6 July -
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Description 
Formal negotiations in France 
betvleen DRV delegation 
Outcome 
10 September 1946 
headed by Ho Chi Minh and 
second-raru~ French officials 
leads to no agreement on any 
substantive issue. 
DRV delegation vTith-
drew in protest over 
convening of Second 
Dalat Conference 
(belO\v), resmned talks, 
then acceded to 
adjourment without 
progress. 
Second Dalat 
Conference, 
1 August 1946 
Franco-DRV 
Modus Vivendi, 
14 September 
1946 
Conference among French, 
Cochinchinese, Laotians, 
Cambodians, Montagnards of 
Annarn: 
1. Announces formation of 
"federal states" under 
French High Commissioner. 
2. 
Denounces DRV delega-
tibn at Fontainbleau as 
unrepresentative. 
3. 
Cambodians and Cochin-
chinese move for direct 
representation in French 
Union and abroad, but 
French refuse. 
After DRV delegation departed 
from Fontainbleau, Ho Chi Minh 
signs agreement with France 
which provides, effective 
30 October 1946: 
1. Reciprocal rights for 
citizens. 
2. Reciprocal property rights 
and restoration seized 
French property in Vietnam. 
3. 
Piastre related to franc. 
4. 
Customs union and free trade 
within Indochina Federation. 
5. 
Armistice Commission to deal 
with guerrilla war in Cochin-
china. 
1. 
Caused break-
down of 
Fontainbleau 
Conference. 
2. 
Erected nelV 
facade of federa-
tion, but led to 
no significant 
political con-
cessions by 
French. 
1. 
Led to some 
release of 
prisoners, and 
lull in guerr~lla 
operations. 
2. 
No sUbstantial 
French political 
concessions 
eventuated. 
A-38 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Event 
"Incidents" at 
Haiphong, Langson, 
and Tourane, 
November, 1946 
Hanoi Incident, 
19 December 1946 
Declaration of the 
Freedom of Cochin-
ch·ina, 4 February 
1947 
First Ha Long Bay 
Agreement , , 
7 December 1947 
I 
! 
I 
I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Description 
6. 
Referendum to decide Cochin-
chin~'s relationship to DRV. 
7. 
France-DRV talks to resume 
in January, 1947. 
Local disputes lead to clashes 
between French and DRV troops. 
Large-scale conflic~ begins, 
spreads throughout Vietnam. 
French High Commissioner 
extends powers of the Saigon 
Government to include: 
1. Legislative and executive 
action on all internal 
affairs. 
2. 
Universal suffrage for 
election of legislature. 
1. 
Bao Dai associates hlifiself 
with French-sponsored 
nationalist movement. 
2. 
French promise in vague 
terms national inde-
pendence for Vietnam. 
Outcome 
1. French seized 
unilateral control 
over Haiphong and 
Langson. 
2. 
French reinforce-
ments landed at 
Tourane in viola-
tion of March 6 
Accord. 
Complete breakdown 
of relations bet,veen 
France and DRV 
1. 
President Le Van 
Hoach of Cochin-
china admitted 
Viet Minh con-
trolled greater 
part of Cochin-
china . 
2. 
Elections 
repeatedly post-
poned because of 
civil disorder. 
1. French took no 
action toward 
releasing their 
control in 
Vietnam . 
2. 
Bao Dai ,d thdrew 
to Europe. 
3. 
Agreement con-
demned by non-Viet· 
Minh nationalists; 
e.g., Ngo Dinh Diem. 
A-39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Event 
Second Ha Long Bay 
Agreement, 5 June 
1948 
Elysee Agreement, 
8 March 1949 
Recognition of 
the Independence of 
the State of Viet-
nam, 14 June 1949 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Description 
1. 
France solemnly recognizes 
the independence of Vietnam 
within the French Union. 
2. 
Bao Dai reassociates himself 
with the attempt to form a 
nationalist government. 
In an exchange of letters 
between Bao Dai and President 
Auriol, France: 
1. 
Reconfirms Vietnam's status 
as an independent Associated 
State within the French 
Union . 
2. 
Agrees to unifying Vietnam, 
and placing it under Viet-
namese administration , 
under terms to be nego-
tiated subsequently. 
3. 
Retains control of Viet-
namese armed forces and 
foreign relations. 
French High Commissioner for 
Indochina and Emperor Bao Dai 
exchange letters in Saigon 
formalizing Elysee Agreement. 
Outcome 
1. 
France trans-
ferred no sig-
nificant political 
pOvler to Viet-
namese. 
2. 
Led only to 
further negotiations 
between Bao Dai and 
France. 
1. French economic 
and political 
primacy remained 
'unchanged, even 
in principle. 
2. 
Cochinchina 
formally merged 
with Annam and Ton-
kin in State of 
Vietnam in June, 
1949. 
3. 
Plans for internal 
administrative 
transfer announced 
30 December 1949. 
4. 
Practical matters 
of transfer of 
administrative func-
tions in principal 
external affairs 
were deferred to 
Pau Negotiations 
1. 
of 1950. 
Cochinchina 
government 
tendered resigna-
tion to Bao Dai, 
merging in prin-
ciple vii th new· 
State of Vietnam. 
2. 
No actual trans-
fer of political 
power occurred. 
A-40 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Event 
French Ratifica-
tion of the Inde-
pendence of 
Vietnam, 
2 February 1950 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Description 
Following National Assembly 
approval (29 January 1950), 
France announces ratification 
of the status for Vietnam 
described in the Elysee 
Agreement. 
A-41 
Outcome 
1. 
U.S. recognized 
State of Vietnam 
(3 February 
1950). 
2. Details of trans-
fer of powers awaited 
Pau Negotiations 
(March-November, 
1956). 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
b. U.S. Policy Toward the Conflict, 1947-1949 
The U.S. manifested increasing concern over the conflict 
in Indochina, but through 1949 American policy continued to regard the 
war as fundamentally a matter for French resolution. It is clear on 
the record that American policy-makers of the day perceived the vacuity 
of French policies in 1946 and 1947. 
The U.S., in its representations 
to France, consistently deplored the prospect of protracted war in 
Vietnam, and urged meaningful concessions to Vietnamese nationalism. 
However, the U.S. · always stopped short of endorsing Ho Chi Minh, 
deterred by Ho's history of communist affiliation. Accordingly, U.S . 
. policy gravitated with that of France toward the Bao Dai solution. 
At 
no point was the U.S. prepared to adopt an openly interventionist 
course. 
To have done so would have clashed with the expressed British 
view that Indochina was an exclusively French concern, and played into 
the hands of France's extremist political parties of both the Right 
and the Left. 
The U.S. was particularly· apprehensive lest by inter-
vening it strengthen the political position of French Communists. 
Moreover, in 1946 and 1947, France and Britain were moving toward an 
anti-Soviet alliance in Europe, and the U.S. was reluctant to press 
a potentially divisive policy. 
Compared with European recovery, and 
escape from communist domination, the U.S. considered the fate of 
Vietnamese nationalism relatively insignificant. 
Further, the dispute 
in 1946 and 1945 oyer the Dutch possession in Indonesia had furnished 
a precedent: 
there the U.S. had moved cautiously, and only after long 
delays, to internationalize the conflict. 
Extensive American and 
British investments in Indonesia, moreover, afforded common ground for 
intervention. 
No similar rationale or commonality existed for inter-
vention in Indochina, since Indochina was almost exclusively a French 
economic preserve, and a political morass which the U.K. was mani-
t 
festly interested in avoi.ding. 
A-42 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The resultant U.S. policy has most of~en been termed "neutralityo" 
It was, however, also consistent with the policy of deferring to French 
volition announced by President Roosevelt's Secretary of State on 
3 April 1945. It was a policy characterized by the same indecision 
that had marked U.S. wartime policy. It was, moreover, a policy formu-
lated with an undertone of indifference: 
at the time, Indochina 
appeared to be one region in which the U.S. might enjoy the luxury of 
abstention. 
When open warfare broke out between the DRV and France in December, 
·l946 , Johp Carter Vincent, Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs, 
in a memorandum to Under Secretary Acheson of 23 December 1946, recom-
mended that the latter call in the French Ambassador to highlight inher-
ent dangers. 
The memorandum incl~ded this acute analysis: 
"Although the French in Indochina have made far-reaching 
paper-concessions to the Vietnamese desire for autonomy, 
French actions on the scene have been directed toward "Thittling 
down the powers and the territorial extent of the Vietnam 
'free state.' This process the Vietnamese have continued to 
resist. 
At the same time, the French themselves admit that 
they l ack the military strength to reconquer the country. 
In 
brief, with inadequate forces, with public opinion sharply at 
odds, with a government rendered l argely ineffective through 
internal division, the French have tried to accomplish in 
Indochina lv-hat a strong and united Britain has found it unvTise 
to attempt in Burmao Given the present elements in the situ-
ation, guerrilla warfare may continue indefinitely." 
Secretary Acheson acted on Mr. Vincent's suggestion, and expressed to 
the Ambassador views summarized as follows: 
"We had anticipated such a situation developing in November 
and events have confirmed our fears. 
While we have no wish to 
A-43 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
offer to mediate under present conditions we do want the French 
GOVT to know that .Te are ready and willing to do anything which 
it might consider helpful in the circumstances. 
We have been 
gratified to learn of Moutet's mission and have confidence in 
his moderation and broad viewpoint. 
We believe however that the 
situation is highly inflammatory and if present unsettled con-
ditions continue, there is a possibility that other powers might 
attempt to bring the matter up before the Security Council. If 
this happens, as in the case of Indonesia, the question will arise 
whether the matter is one of purely French internal concern or a 
situation likely to disturb the peace. 
other powers might like-
wise attempt some form of intervention as has been suggested in 
the Chinese press. 
We would be opposed to such steps, but from 
every point of view it seems important that the question be 
settled as soon as possible. 
Mr. Acheson added that ' he wondered 
whether the French .Tould attempt to reconquer the country through 
military force which was a step that the British had found unwise 
to attempt in Burma. II 58/ 
J 
On 8 January, 1947, the Department of State instructed the American 
Ambassador in Paris that the U.S. would approve sale of arms and arma-
ments to France "except in cases which appear to relate to Indochina. II 59/ 
On the same date, 8 January 1947, the French conveyed to the Department-
of State a message that: 
" •.. the French Government appreciated the understanding 
attitude that Mr. Acheson had shovrn in discussing the problem 
of Indochina; that it had taken note of Mr. Acheson 's offer of 
'good Offices' and appreciated the spirit in which the offer 
was made; and that the French Goverr®ent did not feel that it 
could avail itself of our offer but must continue to handle 
the situation single-handedly along the lines stated by Moutet. 
fihe emissar¥...7 .Tent on to say that the principal objective of 
the French military .ras to restore order and reopen communica-
tions. 
He said that after this was done the French Goverrwent 
would be prepared to discuss matters with the Vietnamese . 
He 
said that the French Goverrwent had every intention of living 
up to the agreement of last March 6 and the modus vivendi of 
September 15, once order l-las restored. /Jie wa!!..! asked ... whether 
he thought the French military could restore order within any 
fores eeable future time. 
He seemed to think, l-lithout much 
evidence of conviction) that they could," 60/ 
There then ensued an interesting exchange between the U.S. official and 
the French representative in .Thich the Frenchman sketched a claim of 
American culpability for the war: 
A-44 
TOP SECRET - Sensi,ti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"Speaking personally) I told him that I thought there ,\.18S 
one flaw in the French approach to the problem worth men-
tioning . 
I had in mind an apparent assumption by the French 
that there vras an equality of responsibility as between the 
French and the Vietnamese. 
I said that this did not seem to 
me to be the case; that the responsibility of France as a 
world power to achieve a solution of the problem was far 
greater than that of the Vietnamese; and that the situation 
was not one which could be localized as a purely French-
Vietnamese one but might affect adversely conditions through-
out Southeast Asia. 
'iYhe emissarz7 quickly substituted the vrord 'authority' 
for 'respons~bility' and said that the French were novr faced 
,.,ith the problem of reasserting their authority and that vre must 
share the responsibility for their delay in doing so because 
we had not acceded to French requests in the autumn of 1945 
for material assistance." 61/ 
Early in February) the U.S. Ambassador in Paris was instructed to 
reassure Premier Ramadier of the "very friendliest feelings" of the U.S. 
toward France and its interest in supporting France's recovering eco-
nomic) political and military strength: 
"In spite any misunderstanding "hich might have arisen in 
minds French in regard to our position concerning Indochina 
they must appreciate that we have fully recognized France's 
sovereign position in that area and vre do not vlish to have it 
appear that we are in any way endeavoring undermine that posi-
tion) and French should know it is our desire to be helpful and 
we stand ready assist any appropriate vlay we can to find solution 
for Indochinese problem. 
At same time we cannot shut out eyes 
to fact that there are two sides this problem and that our reports 
indicate both a lack French understanding of other side (more in 
Saigon than in Paris) and continued existence dangerously out-
t 
moded colonial outlook and methods in area. 
Furthermore) there 
is no escape from fact that trend of times is to effect that colonial 
empires in XIX Century sense are rapidly becoming thing of past .. 
Action Brit in India and Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are out-
standing examples this trend) and French themselves took cognizance 
of it both in nelof Constitution and in their agreements with Viet-
nam. 
On other hand we do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has 
direct Communist connections and it should be obvious that vle are 
not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations supplanted 
by philosophy and political organizations emanating from and con-
trolled by Kremlin .•.. " 
"Frankly we have no solution of problem to suggest. 
It is 
basically matter for tvro parties to '\wrk out themselves and from 
your reports and those from Indochina we are led to feel that 
both parties have endeavored to keep door open to some sort of 
A-45 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
settlement. 
We appreciate·fact that Vietnam started present 
fighting in Indochina on December 19 and that this action has 
made it more difficult for French to adopt a position of 
generosity and conciliation. 
Nevertheless vre hope that French 
wiil find it possible to be more than generous in trying to 
find a solution." 62/ 
Thus, the U.S. chose to remain outside the conflict; the announced 
U.S. position was, in the words of Secretary of State George C. Marshall, 
to hope that "a pacific basis of adjustment of the difficulties could be 
found. ·" 63/ 
Events conspired against this hope, hOI-rever, and as the 
fight in g-Co nt inued, the prospect of a Moscow-controlled state in Vietnam 
continued to dravr the U. S. nearer to involvement. 
On 13 May 1947, the 
Department of State furnished the following guidance to U.S o diplomats 
in Paris, Saigon, and Hanoi; 
"Key our position is our mrareness that in respect develop-
ments affecting position \oJ'estern democratic powers in southern 
Asia, we essentially in same boat as French, also as British 
and Dutch. 
We cannot conceive setbacks to long-range interests 
France which would not also be setbacks our ovrn. 
Conversely We 
should regard close association France and members French Union as 
not only to advantage peoples concerned, but indirectly our o~~. 
"In our vievr, southern Asia in critical phase its history 
with seven new nations in process"'achieving or struggling inde-
pendence or autonomy. 
These nations include quarter inhabitants 
world and their future course, ovring sheer weight populations, 
resources they cormnand, and strategic location, will be momentous 
factor world stability. 
Follm-ling relaxation European controls, 
internal raCial, religiOUS, and national differences could plunge 
new nations into violent discord, or already apparent anti-Western 
Pan-Asiatic tendencies could become dominant political force, or 
Communists could capture control. 
We consider as best safeguard 
against these eventualities a continued close association bet,veen 
neidy-autonomous peoples and powers which have long been respon-
sible their welfare. 
In particular i.;re recognize Vietnamese will 
for indefinite period require French material and technical 
assistance and enlightened political guidance which can be provided 
only by nation steeped like France in democratic tradition and 
confirmed in respect human liberties and vmrth individual. 
"We equally convinced) however, such association must be 
voluntary to be lasting and achieve results, and that protraction 
present situation Indochina can only destroy basic voluntary 
cooperation, l eave legacy permanent bitterness) and irrevocably 
alienate Vietnamese from France and those values represented by 
France and other Western democracies. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IIWhile fully appreciating difficulti es French position this 
conflict} we feel there is danger in any arrangement which might 
provide Vietnamese opportunity compare unfavorably their own 
position and that of other peoples southern Asia who have made 
tremendous strides toward autonomy since war . 
IIWhile ve are still ready and willing do anything we can 
which might be considered helpfu~} French will understand 
we not attempting come fOTlvard with any solution our mm or 
intervene in situati on. 
However} they will also understand 
we inescapably concerned with situation Far East generally} upon 
which developments Indochina likely have profound effect .... 
IIFor your INFO) evidence that French Communists are being 
directed accel erate their agitation French colonies even extent 
lose much popular support France (URTEL 1719 Apr 25) may be 
indication Kremlin prepared sacrifice temporary gains .lith 
40 million French to long range colonial strategy .lith 600 mil-
lion dependent people) .Thich lends great urgency foregoing 
views .. .. DEPT much concerned lest French efforts find QUOTE 
t rue representatives Vietnam UNQUOTE ,vith .Thom negotiate result 
creation impotent puppet 
GO~' along lines Cochinchina regime) 
or that restoration Baodai LSi£7 may be attempted) implyi ng 
democracies reduced resort monarchy as weapon against Communism. 
You may refer these further views if nature your conversat i ons 
French. appears warrant. II fA/ 
The U.S. position may have i nfluenced the French to r evise the first 
Ha Long Bay Agreement (December) 1947) and when the second agreement 
was signed in June ) 1948) the U.S. promptly i nstructed the U.S. 
Ambassador t o lIapply such persuasion and/ or pressure as i s best 
calculated [f9..7 produce desired r esult ll of France's lIunequivocally 
and promptly approving the principl e of Viet independence.
1I 65/ 
Again) 
however} the Ambassador was instructed to avoid ostensible intervention 
t 
\ 
while making it clear that the U.S. foresaw France's lOSing Indochina 
if it persisted to i gnore American advice. 
These instructions were 
r epeated at the end of August} 1948) '.-lith the assertion that the Depart-
ment of State IIb elieves nothing should be left undone llhich will 
strengthen t r uly nationalist groups in Indochina and induce present 
supporters of the Viet Minh to . come tQ the side of that group. II 66/ 
The first suggestions that the UoS. became tangibly involved in 
Vietnam appear in a reported conversation of the U.S. Ambassador with 
the French Foreign Off ice in September) 1948 . 
The U.S. Ambassador 
again urged on France l egislati on or other definite action to move 
toward the unification of Vietnam) and the immediate negotiation of 
concrete steps toward autonomy as envisaged by the Ha Long Bay Agreement. 
He then t old the French r epresentat ive that : 
A-47 
TOp SECRET - Sensitive 
1 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP . SECRET. - Sensi ti ve 
" .. ~ US is fully appreciative difficulties vrhich face French 
Government in Indochina at this time and reminds him that US 
had already indicated its willingness) if French Government so 
desired) to give public indication its approval of concrete 
steps by French Government to come to grips with basic political 
problem of Indochina. 
I informed him that US also willing 
under similar circumstances to consider assisting French Govern-
ment Ivith respect to matter of financial aid for Indochina 
through ECA but could not give consideration to altering its 
present policy in this regard unless real progress made in 
reaching non-Communi st solution in Indochina based on coopera-
tion of true nationalists of that country." 671 
As negotiations prQceeded with Bao Dai preliminary to the Elysee 
Agreement) the Department of State instructed the American Ambassador 
in Paris) on 17 January 1949) that : 
"While the Department is desirous of the French coming to 
terms with Bao Da i or any truly nationalist group which has a 
reasonable chance of winning over the preponderance of Viet-
namese) vie cannot at this time irretrievably commit the U.S. 
to support of a native gove~nment which by failing to develop 
appeal among Vietnamese might become virtually a puppet govern-
ment separated from the people and existing only by the presence 
of French military forces ." fBI 
'"' 
FollOlving the Elysee Agreement) the U.S. was better disposed tm,rarcl 
providing aid in Indochina. 
On 10 May 1949) the American Consul in 
Saigon was informed that the U.S. desired the "Bao Dai experiment " to 
succeed) since there appeared to be no other alternative. 
I1At .· the proper time and under the proper circumstances) the 
Department will be prepared to do its part by extending recog-
nition to the Bao Dai government and by expressing the possibility 
of complying with any request by such a government for U.S. anns 
and economic assistance . 
It must be understood) hmlever) that an 
aid program of this nature would require Congressional approval. 
Since the U. S. could) hmrever) scarcely afford backing a govern-
ment vlhich vTOuld have the color. and be likely to suffer the fate 
of a puppet regime) it must be clear that France will offer all 
necessary concessions to make the Bao Dai solution attractive to 
the nationalists. 
This is a st~~ o~ wh ~ch the French ~hemselves 
must see the urgency and neces s l~y In Vlew of the posslbly short 
time remaining before Communist successes in China are felt in 
Indochina. 
Moreover) the Bao Dai government must through its 
own eftorts demonstrate the capacity to organize and conduct 
affairs wisely so as to insure the maximum opportunity for ob-
tainink requisite popular support) inasmuch as a government 
created in Indochina analogous to the Kuomintang vTOuld be fore-
doomed to failure. " 69/ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
But "anti-communism" initially proved to be no better guideline 
for the formulation of American policy in Indochina than it had been 
for the French~ Indeed) early U.S. attempts to discern the nature 
and extent of communist influence in Vietnam devolved to the seeming 
paradox that if Ho Chi Minh were communist) he seemed to have no 
visible ties with Moscow. 
For example) a State Department appraisal 
of Ho Chi Minh provided to the U.S. Ambassador in China in July) 
1948) was admittedly speculative: 
"l. 
Depts info indicates that Ho Chi Minh is Com-
munist. 
His long and well-known record in Comintern 
during tvrenties and thirties, continuous support by French 
Communist newspaper Humanite since 1945, praise given him 
by Radio MOSCOlv (.,hich for past six months has been devoting 
increasing attention to Indochina) and fact he has been 
called 'leading communist' by recent Russian publications 
as well as Daily Worker makes any other conclusion appear 
to be wishful thj_nking. 
"2. 
Dept has no evidence of direct link between Ho 
and MoscOl-r but assumes it exists, nor is it able evaluate 
amount pressure or guidance Moscow exerting. 
We have 
impression Ho must be given or is retaining large degree 
latitude. 
Dept considers that USSR accomplishing its 
immediate aims in Indochina by (a) pinning dmm large 
numbers of French troops, (b)_ causing steady drain upon 
French economy thereby tending retard recovery and dissi-
pate ECA assistance to France, and (c) denying to world 
generally surpluses IVhich Indochina normally has available 
thus perpetuating conditions of disorder and shortages 
which favorable to grm-rth communism. 
Furthermore, Ho seems 
quite capable of retaining and even strengthening his grip 
on Indochina with no outside assistance other than con-
tinuing procession of French puppet govts." 70/ 
I 
-
' 
, 
In the fall of 1948, the Office of Intelligence Research in the 
Depar~ment of State conducted a survey of communist influence in 
Southeast Asia. 
Evidence Of Kremlin-directed conspiracy .Tas 
found in virtually all countries except Vietnam: 
"iince December 19, 1946, there have been continuous 
confl1cts bet'\oTeen French forces and the nationalist govern-
ment of Vietnam. 
This government is a coalition in which 
avolVed communists hold influential positions. Although the 
French aQmit the influence of this govermnent, they have 
consistently refused to deal with its leader, Ho Chi Minh, 
on thl grounds that he is a communist. 
A-49 
TOP SECRET 
~ Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
liTo date the Vietnam press and radio have not adopted 
an anti-American position. It is rather the French colonial 
press that has been strongly anti-American and has freely 
accused the U.S. of imperialism in Indochina to the point 
of approximating the official Moscow position. 
Although the 
Vietnam radio has been closely watched for a new position 
toward the U.S., no change has appeared so far. 
Nor does 
there seem to have been any split within the coalition govern-
ment of Vietnmn. o •• 
IIEvaluation. If there is a Moscow-directed conspiracy 
in Southeast Asia, Indochina is an anomoly so faro 
Possible 
explanations. are : 
1. 
No rigid directives have been issued by Moscow. 
2. 
The Vietnam government considers that it has 
no rightest elements that must be purged. 
3. 
The Vietnam Communists are not subservient to 
the foreign policies pursued by Moscow. 
4. 
A special dispensation for the Vietnam govern-
menthas been arranged in Moscow. 
Of these possibilities, the first and fourth seem most likely. II]]) 
t 
A-50 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1 
I 
LA.3. 
r 
LA.3 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
3. 
Origins of the U.S .. Involvement in Vietnam .•.•.•••.••• o ••••••• ~_5l 
a. 
The Policy Context •••.•.•..••.•.•••..•.••.•..••.•• o •••••••• A-51 
b. 
The U.S. Enters the War .•••••... 0 •••••••••••••••••••••••••• A-58 
3. 
Origins of the U.S. Involvement in Vietnam 
a. 
The Policy Context 
f"' 
, Events in China of 1948 and 1949 brought the United States 
to a new awareness of the vigor of communism in Asia, and to a sense of 
urgency over its containment. 
U.S. policy instruments developed to 
meet unequivocal communist challenges in Europe were applied to the 
problem of the Far East . 
Concurrent with the development of NATO, a 
U.S. search began for collective security in Asia; economic and military 
assistance programs were inaugurated ; and the Truman Doctrine acquired 
w·holly ne-v[ dimensions by extension :i.nto regions where the European em-
pires were being dismantled. 
In March, 1947, President Truman had set 
forth the following policy guidelines: 
11 ~ belie~e that it must be the policy of the United 
States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted 
subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures. 
A-51 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I believe we must assist free peoples to work out their 
mill destinies in their own way •... " 72/ 
The President went on to underscore the U.S. determination to commit 
its resources to contain communism. 
While he clearly subordinated 
military aid to economic and political means) he did assert the U.S. 
intent to assist in maintaining security: 
"To insure the peaceful development of nations) free 
from coercion} the United States has taken a leading 
part in establishing the United Nations. 
The United 
Nations is designed to make possible freedom and inde-
pendence fo~ all its members. 
We shall not realize our 
objectives} however) unless we are willing to help free 
peoples to maintain their free institutions and their 
national integrity against aggressive movements that seek 
to ilnpose upon them totalitarian regimes." 73/ 
In the year 1947} while U.S. military assistance began to flow 
into Greece to vrard off subversive aggression) the U.S. inaugurated 
the European Recovery Plan (ERP). 
ERP was aimed at economic recovery 
in Western Europe} especially in coUntries such as France and Italy 
where post-Far depression was fostering marked leftv18rd politj_cal 
trends. 
nl one of the high level appraisals of the situation that 
the U.S. had to counter in 19~' 7) the Harriman Committee on Foreign 
Aid has concluded that: 
"The interest of the United States in Europe ... cannot 
be measured simply in economic terms. 
It is also strategic 
and political. 
We all know that 1{e are faced in the world 
today vrith tvro conflicting ideologies .... OUr position in 
the world has been based for at least a century on the 
existence in Europe of a number of strong states committed 
by tradition and inclination to the democratic concept .... II 1!:.1 
t 
The fall of the Czechoslovakian Government in February 1948 brought 
about the Brussels Pact) a Western European collective defense and 
economic collaboration arrangement . 
The blockade of Berlin) which 
began on 1 April 1948) accelerated U.S. movement tovrard membership 
in the alliance. 
On June 11) 1948 the U.S. Senate adopted a resolu-
tion adviSing the.Executive to undertake the: 
" ..• Progressive development of regional and other 
collective arrangements for individual and collective 
self-defense in accordance _lith the purposes} principles) 
and provisions of the Charter LOf the ~) association of 
A-52 
TOP 'SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the United States, by constitutional process, with such 
regional and other collective arrangements as are based 
on continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, and 
as affect its national security.1t 75/ 
That same month, Congress passed the Economic Cooperation Act, and in 
July, 1948, opened negotiations for a North Atlantic Alliance. 
The 
North Atlantic Treaty was signed in April, 1949, and entered into 
forc e in August of that year. 
In the same omnibus foreign assistance legislation which had 
authorized ECA in June) 1948, Congress had provided for a China Aid 
Program . 
This measure met almost immediate failure, for Mao's armies 
spread unchecked over the China mainland, and by mid-1949 the posi-
tion of the nationalists there was untenable. 
The Itfailure lt of U.S. 
aid -- which was termed such by Congressional critics -- no less 
than the urgent situation in Europe and the exploding of the first 
Soviet nuclear device in September, 1949, figured in Congressional 
action on military assistance l egislation. 76/ 
On October 6, 1949, Congress passed the Mutual Defense Assist-
ance Program (MDAP ) through which U.S. arms, military equipment and 
training assistance might be provided world-wide for collective 
defense. 
In the first appropriations under MDAP, NATO countries 
received 76% of the total, and Greece and Turkey (not yet NATO mem-
bers), 16%. 11/ 
But Korea and the Philippines received modest aid, 
and the legislators clearly intended the lav to underwrite sub-
sequent appropriations for collective security in Asia. 
The opening 
paragraph of the l aw not only supported NATO, but foreshadowed the 
Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty: 
ItAn Act to Promote the Foreign Policy and Provide for 
the Defense and General Welfare of the United States 
by Furnishing Military Assistance to Foreign Nations, 
Approved October 6, 1949. 
ItBe it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa-
tives of the United States of America in Congress assembled) 
That this Act may be cited as the 'Mutual Defense Assistance 
Act of 1949. ' 
ItFINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY 
ItThe Congress of the United States reaffirms the policy of 
the United States to achieve i nternational peace and security 
through the United Nations so that armed force shall not be 
A-53 
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
used except in the common interest. 
The Congress hereby finds 
that the efforts of the United States and other countries to 
promote peace and security in furtherance of the pUl~oses of 
the Charter of the United Nations require additional measures 
of support based upon the principle of continuous and effective 
self-help and mutual aid. 
These measures include the furnishing 
of military assistance essential to enable the United States 
and other nations dedicated to the purposes and principles of 
the United Nations Charter to participate effectively in arrange-
ments for individual and collective self-defense in support 
of those purposes and principles. 
In furnishing such military 
assistance) it remains the policy of the United States to con-
tinue to exert maximum efforts to obtain agreements to provide 
the United Nations.with armed forces as contemplated in the 
Charter and agreements to achieve universal control of weapons 
of mass destruction and universal regulation and reduction of 
armaments ) including armed forces) under adequate safeguards to 
protect complying nations against violation and evasion. 
"The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the cre-
ation by the free countries and the free peoples of the Far 
East of a joint organization) consistent >;dth the Charter of 
the United Nations) to establish a program of self-help and 
mutual cooperation designed to develop their economic and 
social well-being) to safeguard basic rights and liberties 
and to protect their security and independence. 
. 
"The Congress recognizes that economic recovery is essen-
tial to international peace and security and must be given 
clear priority. 
The Congress also recognizes that the increased 
confidence of free peoples in thei.r ability to resist direct or 
indirect aggression and to maintain internal security will 
advancy such recovery and support political stability.1t 78/ 
J 
While Congress was deliberating on MDAP) the staff of the National 
Security CoUncil) at the request of the Secretary of Defense) had been 
reexamining U.S. policy tOivard Asia. 
In June) 1949) the Secretary had 
noted that he was : 
It., •• increasingly concerned at the ... advance of communism 
in la~~e a~eas ?f the ~orld and particularly the successes of 
commurrsm In·Chlna .... 
Ill). major objective of United States policy) as I understand 
it) is to contain communism in order to reduce its threat to 
our sJcurity. 
Our actions in Asia should be part of a care-
fully , considered and comprehens ive plan to further that objec-
tive. ~' 79/ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The NSC study responding to the Secretary's request is remarkable 
for the rarity of its specific references to Indochina. 
The staff 
study focused, rather, on generalities concerning the conflict between 
the interests of European metropoles and the aspirations of subject 
Asian peoples for independence. 
The following extract is from the 
section of the study dealing vlith Southeast Asia: 
liThe current conflict between colonialism and native 
independence is the most important political factor in south-
east Asia. 
This conflict results not only from the decay of 
European imperial pOl{er in the area but also from a ,{idening 
political consciousness and the rise of militant nationalism 
among the subject peoples. 
With the exception of Thailand and 
the Philippines, the southeast Asia countries do not possess 
leaders practiced in the exercise of responsible pOl{er. 
The 
question of whether a colonial country is fit to govern itself, 
however, is not always relevant in practical politics. 
The 
real issue ,{QuId seem to be whether the colonial country is 
able and determined to make continued foreign rule an overall 
losing proposition for the metropolitan povTer. 
If it is, 
independence for the colonial country is the only practical 
solution, even though misgovernment eventuates. 
A solution of 
the consequent problem of instability, if it arises, must be 
sought on a non-imperialist plane. 
In any event, colonial-
nationalist conflict provides a fertile field for subversive 
communist activities, and it is nov clear that southeast Asia 
is the target of a coordinated offensive directed by the Kremlin. 
In seeking to gain control of southeast ASia, the Kremlin is 
motivated in part by a desire to acquire southeast Asia's 
resources and communication lines) and to deny them to us. 
But the political gains vhich would accrue to the USSR from 
communist capture of southeast Asia are equally significant. 
The extension of communist authority in China represents a 
grievous political defeat for USj if southeast Asia also is 
svept by communism we shall have suffered a major political 
t 
rout the repercussions of vThich ,{ill be felt throughout the 
rest of the world) especially in the Middle East and in a then 
critically exposed Australia. 
The United States should con-
tinue to use its influence looking tmrard resolving the colonial 
nationalist conflict in such a vay as to satisfy the fundamental 
demands of the nationalist-colonial conflict) lay the basis for 
political stability and resistance to communism, and avoid 
weakening the' colonial povTers who are our western allies. 
How-
ever, it must be remembered that the long colonial tradition 
in Asia has left the peoples of that area suspicious of Western 
influence. 
We must approach the problem from the ASiatic point 
of viev in so far as possible and should refrain from taking 
the lead in movements i{hich must of necessity be of Asian 
origin. 
It will therefore be to our interest vherever possible 
A-55 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
to encourage the peoples of India, Pakistan, the Philippines 
and other Asian states to take the leadership in meeting the 
common problems of the area .... 
"It vlOuld be to the interest of the United States to make 
use of the skills, knowledge and long experience of our European 
friends and, to whatever extent may be possible, enlist their 
cooperation in measures designed to check the spread of USSR 
influence in Asia. 
If members of the British Commonwealth, 
particularly India, Pakistan, Australia and New Zealand, can 
be persuaded to join with the United Kingdom and the United 
States in carrying out constructive measures of economic, 
political and cultural cooperation, the results will certainly 
be in our interest. 
Not only will the United States be able 
thus to relieve itpelf of part of the burden, but the coopera-
tion of the white nations of the Commonwealth will arrest any 
potential dangers of the growth of a white-colored polarization." 80/ 
On December 30, 1949, the National Security Council met with President 
Truman presiding, discussed the NSC staff study, and approved the fol-
lowing conclusions: 
"As the basis for realization of its objectives, the United 
States should pursue a policy toward Asia containing the following 
components: 
"a. 
The United States should make knmm its sympathy 
with the efforts of Asian leaders to form regional associations 
of non-Communist states of the various Asian areas, and if in 
due course associations eventuate, the United States should be 
prepared, if invited, to assist such associations to fulfill 
their purposes under conditions w'hich would be to our interest. 
The following principles should guide our actions in this respect: 
(1) Any association formed must be the result of 
a genuine desire on the part of the participating nations to 
cooperate for mutual benefit in solving the political, economic, 
social and cultural problems of the area. 
(2) 
The United States must not take such an active 
part ;in the early stages of the formation of such an associa-
tion that it will be subject to the charge of using the Asiatic 
nati01s to further United States ambitions. 
I 
(3) 
The association, if it is to be a constructive 
force, must operate on the basis of mutual aid and self-help in 
all fields so that a true partnership may exist based on equal 
right , and equal obligations. 
! 
(4 ) United States participation in any stage of the 
development of such an association should be with a vievT to accom-
plishing our basic objectives in Asia and to assuring that any 
A-56 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
association formed will be in accord with Chapter VIII of the 
Charter of the United Nations dealing with regional arrange-
ments. 
Itb. 
The United States should act to develop and strengthen 
the security of the area from Communist external aggression or 
internal subversion. 
These steps should take into account any 
benefits to the security of Asia which may flow from the develop-
ment of one or more regional groupings. 
The United States on its 
own initiative should now; 
(1) 
Improve the United States position with respect 
to Japan, the Ryukyus and the Philippines . 
. (2) 
Scrutinize closely the development of threats 
from Communist aggression, direct or indirect, and be prepared to 
help within our means to meet such threats by providing political, 
economic, and military assistance and advice where clearly needed 
to supplement the resistance of the other governments in and out 
of the area i-lhich are more directly concerned . 
(3) 
Develop cooperative measures through multi-
lateral or bilateral arrangements to combat Communist internal 
subversion. 
(4) 
Appraise the desirability and the means of 
developing in Asia sane form of collective security arrangements, 
bearing in mind the following considerations: 
(a) 
The reluctance of India at this time to 
join in any anti-Communist security pact and the influence this 
will have among the other nations of Asia. 
(b) 
The necessity of assuming that any collec-
tive security arrangements which might be developed be based on 
t 
the principle of mutual aid and on a demonstrated desire and 
ability to share in the burden by all the participating states. 
(c) 
The necessity of assuring that any such 
security arrangements ,",auld be consonant with the purposes of 
any regional association which may be formed in accordance with 
paragraph 3-a above. 
(d) 
The necessity of assuring that any such 
security arrangement i-TOuld be in conformity with the provisions 
of Article 51 of the Charter relating to individual and collec-
tive self-defense. 
Itc • 
The United States should encourage the creation of 
an atmosphere favorable to economic recovery and development in 
non-Communist Asia, and to the revival of trade along multi-
lateral, non-discriminatory lines. 
The economic policies of the 
A-57 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP. SECRET - Sensitive 
United States should be adapted to promote) where possible) 
economic conditions that ,vill contribute to political stability 
in friendly countries of Asia) but the United States should 
carefully avoid assuming responsibility for the economic 1-Tel-
fare and development of that continent .... 11 
* * * 
lIh. 
The United States should continue to use its influ-
ence in Asia toward resolving the colonial-nationalist conflict 
in such a way as to satisfy the fundamental demands of the 
nationalist movement while at the same time minimizing the strain 
on the colonial pOlvers I-1ho are our Western allies. Particular 
attention should be given to the problem of French Indo-China and 
action should be taken to bring home to the French the urgency of 
removing the barriers to the obtaining by Bao Dai or other non-
Communist nationalist l eaders of the support of a substantial 
proportion of the Vietnamese .... 
111. 
Active consideration should be given to means by 
1-lhich all members of the British Commonlvealth may be induced 
to playa more active role in collaboration with the United 
States in Asia. 
Similar collaboration should be obta ined to 
the extent possible from other non-Communist nations having 
interests in Asia. 
lIj. 
Recognizing that the non-Communist governments of 
South Asia already constitute a bul'-lark against Communist 
expansion in ASia) the United States should exploit every oppor-
tunity to increase the present Western orientation of the area 
and to assist) vithin our capabilities) its governments in their 
efforts to meet the minimum aspirations of their people and to 
maintain internal security. 11 81/ 
Thus) in the closing months of 1949) the course of U.S. policy was 
set to block further communist expansion in Asia : 
by collective security 
if the Asians were forthcoming) by collaboration with major European 
allies and commonwealth nations) if possible) but bilaterally if neces-
sary. 
On that policy course lay the Korean War of 1950-1953) the forming 
of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization of 1954) and the progressively 
deepening U.S. involvement in Vietnam. 
b. 
The U. S. Enters the liar 
On December .30) 1949) the French signed over ten separate 
implementing agreements relating to the transfer of internal adminis-
tration in Vietnam to Bao Dails State of Vietnam) in accordance with the 
Elysee Agreement of March 8) 1949. 
By January) 1950) Maols l egions had 
reached Vietnam I s northern frontier) and North Vietnam ,<{as moving into 
the Sino-Soviet orbit. 
A Department of State telegram r eviewed U.S. 
policy as of 20 January 1950: 
A-58 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IIDEPT still hopeful Bao Dai will succeed in gaining in-
creasing popular support at HO's expense and our policy remains 
essentially the same; to encourage him and to urge FR toward 
further concessions. 
liThe start made by Bao Dai, the qualities exhibited by him, 
and his initial reception seem to have been better than we 
might have anticipated, even discounting optimism of FR sources. 
Transfer of pover apparently well received. 
FR success in dis-
arming and interning fleeing CHI Nationalists without serious 
intervention to the present by CHI COMMIES also encouraging. 
II HOI-leve r, more recently, marked opposition has been encoun-
tered I-lhich'demonstrates at least that Bao Dai's popular support 
has not yet widened. 
Increased Viet Minh MIL activity is dis-
quieting. 
This CLD be special effort by Ho, timed to coincide 
with transfer of power and the arrival of CHI CO~ll~IES armies on 
frontier, and to precede Bangkok Conference, or CLD be evidence 
of increasing strength reinforced by hopes of CHI CQ~IE support, 
direct or indirect. 
"DEPT has as yet no knowledge of negotiations betl-leen Ho and 
Mao groups although radio intercept of New China Ne,-ls Agency 
release of JAN 17 indicates that Ho has messaged the 'GOVTS of 
the '\wrld' that 'the GOVT of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam 
is the only legal GOVT of the Vietnam people' and is 'ready to 
establish DIPL relations I-lith any GOVT which ~-lLD be I-lilling to 
cooperate with her on the basis of equality and mutual respect 
of national sovereignty and territory so as to defend 'l-lorld 
peace and democracy. 
HO's radio making similar professions .... 
"Nature and timing of recognition of Bao Dai now under 
consideration here and vith other GOVTS •... " 82/ 
First the Chinese Communists, and then the Soviets recognized the 
DRY. 
On 29 January 1950, the French National Assembly approved legis-
lation granting autonomy to the State of Vietnam. 
On February 1, 195Q, 
Secretary of state Acheson made the following public statement : 
liThe recognition by the Kremlin of Ho Chi Minh's commun-
ist movement in Indochina comes as a surprise. 
The Soviet 
acknowledgment of this movement should remove any illusions 
as to the 'nationalist' nature of Ho Chi Minh's aims and 
reveals Ho in his true colors as the mortal enemy of native 
independence in Indochina. 
IIAlthough timed in an effort to cloud the transfer of 
sovereignty by France to the legal Governments of Laos, Cambodia. 
and Vietnam, I-le have every reason to believe that those legal 
A-59 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
governments will proceed in their development toward stable 
governments representing the true nationalist sentiments of 
more than 20 million peoples of Indochina. 
"French action in transferring sovereignty to Vietnam, Laos 
and Cambodia has been in process for some time. 
Following French 
ratification, vlhich is expected "\-rithin a few days, the way will 
be open for recognition of these legal governments by the countries 
of the world whose policies support the development of genuine 
national independence in former colonial areas. 
Ambassador Jessup 
has already expressed to Emperor Bao Dai our best wishes for 
prosperity and stability in Vietnam, and the hope that closer 
relationship will be established between Vietnam and the United 
States." 83/ 
Formal French ratification of Vietnamese independence was announced 
on 2 February 1950. 
President Truman approved U.S. recognition for 
Bao Dai the same date, and on 4 February, the American Consul General 
in Saigon was instructed to deliver the following message to Bao Dai: 
"Your Imperial Majesty: 
"I have Your Majesty I s l etter in "l-rhich I am informed of 
the signing of the agreements of March 8, 1949 between Your 
Majesty, on behalf of Vietnam, and the President of the French 
Republic, on behalf of France. 
My Government has also been 
informed of the ratification on February 2, 1950 by the French 
Government of the agreements of March 8, 19l~9. 
"Since these acts establish the Republic of Vietnam as 
an independent State within the French Union, I take this 
opportunity to congratulate Your Majesty and the people of 
Vietnam on this happy occasion. 
"The Government of the United States of America is pleased 
to ·"\-lelcome the Republic of Vietnam into the community of peace-
loving nations of the world and to extend diplomatic recognition 
to the GovernJnent of the Republic of Vietnam. 
I look forl{ard to 
an early exchange of diplomatic representatives between our t"l-lO 
countries .... " 84/ 
RecogniU.on of Bao Dai "l-laS followed swiftly by French requests for 
U.S. aid. 
On May'S, 1950, Secretary of State Acheson released the fol-
lowing statement in Paris: 
"The fjrenc'E.7 Foreign Minister and I have just had an ex-
change of views on the situation in Indochina and are in general 
agreement both as to the urgency of the situation in that area 
and as to the neces sity for remedial action. 
We have noted the 
A-60 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
fact that the problem of meeting the threat to the security 
of Viet Nam) Cambodia) and Laos which now enjoy independence 
within the French Union is primarily the responsibility of 
France and the Governments and peoples of Indochina. 
The 
United States recognizes that the solution of the Indochina 
problem depends both upon the restoration of security and upon 
the development of genuine nationalism and that United States 
assistance can and should contribute to these major objectives. 
"The United States Government, convinced that neither 
national independence nor democratic evolution exist in any 
area dominated by Soviet linperialism) considers the situation 
to be such as to warrant its according economic aid and mili-
tary equipment to the Associated States of Indochina and to 
France in order to' assist them in restoring stability and 
permitting these states to pursue their peaceful and demo-
cratic development." 85/ 
On May 11, 1950, the Acting Secretary of State made the follm-Ting 
statement: 
"A special survey mission, headed by R. Allen Griffin, has 
just returned from Southeast Asia and reported on economic and 
technical assistance needed in that area. 
Its over-all recom-. 
mendations for the area are modest and total in the neighborhood 
of $60 million. 
The Department is working on plans to imple-
ment that program at once. 
"Secretary Acheson on Monday in Paris cited the urgency of 
the situation applying in the associates states of Viet-Nam, 
Laos and Cambodia. 
The Department is working jOintly ,vith ECA 
to impelment the economic and technical assistance reco~nenda­
tions for Indochina as vell as the other states of Southeast 
Asia and anticipates that this program vill get underway in the 
immed i~te future. 
I 
"Military assistance for Southeast Asia is being worked out 
by the Department of Defense in cooperation with the Depart-
ment qf State, and the details will not be made public for 
security reasons. 
I 
"¥ilitary assistance needs will be 
emergency fund of $15 million provided 
area 6f China. 
met from the President's 
under MDAP for the general 
;,1conomic assistance needs will be met from the ECA China 
Aid funds, part of vhich both Houses of Congress have indicated 
will be made available for the general area of China . 
Final 
I 
A-6l 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
legislative action is still pending on this authorization 
but is expected to be completed within the next week. II 86/ 
The United States thereafter 'Ivas directly involved in the developing 
tragedy in Vietnam. 
A-62 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
] 
I.A; 
Notes 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1. A. 
FOOTNOTES 
1. U.S. Department of State, Doctunentary History of United States Policy 
Toward Indochina, 1940-1953 (Historical Office, Research Project No. 
354, April, 1954) TS; see also U.S. Congress, House, Foreign Relations 
of the United States Diplomatic Papers, 1944 (House Document No. 303, 
1965 ), III, 769-784; Ruth B. Russell, A History of the United Nations 
Charter (Washington: 
Brookings Institution, 1958), 173-174. 
2. 
Ibid. 
Included in the Documentary History ... , op. cit., is a Memoran-
dum of Conversation between Roosevelt and Stalin, Teheran, November 28, 
1943 (SECRET ). 
The President is said to have then considered that 
a twenty-to thirty-year period would be necessary before the Indochinese 
peoples would be ready for independence. 
3. 
Speech of Foreign Minister Pineau, New York Times, March 5, 1956. 
4. 
Russell, op. cit., 79. 
5. 
Ibid., 174, quoting Cordell Hull, Memoirs, II, 1957; u.s. Department 
of State, Documentary History ... , op. cit., A-IO. 
6. 
Ernest J. King and Walter M. Whitehill, Fleet Admiral King: 
A Naval 
Record (1952 ), 569; quoted in Russell, op . cit., 574. 
7· 
8. 
9· 
10. 
11. 
John Ehrman, Grand Strategy : 
August 1943-Se-ptember 19Lf4, Vol. v. (1956), 
4Lf2; quoted in Russell, op. cit., 574. 
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History ... , op. cit., A-16. 
Ibid., A-16. 
Extract from Stettinius Diary; quoted in U.S. State Department Study, 
Documentary History ... , op. cit., A-17. 
I 
I 
William D. Leahy, I Was There (New York: McGrai'T-Hill, 1950), 244, 269, 
286. 
12. 
Russell, op. cit., 575. 
13· In March 1945, the President r emarked to Gen. Wedemeyer, then command-
ing officer for U.S. forces in China, "that he must watch carefully 
to prevknt British and French political activities in the area and 
that hel should give only such support to the British and French as 
would b~ required in direct operations against the Japanese ." U.S. 
Department of State, Forei n Relations of the United States Di lomatic 
Papers: ! The Conference of Berlin (the Potsdam Conference , 1945, I, 
917. 
A-63 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
14. 
The de Gaulle representations were made orally to the U.S. Ambassa-
dor. 
See UoS. Department of State) telegram 1196 from Paris, 
13 March, and Documentary History ... , A-19, A-20. 
150 
Leahy, I Was There, op. cit., pp. 338-339. 
On the basis of 
research into the Air Force archives, Bernard Fall wrote in 
Street Without Joy (Harrisburg, Pa.: 
Stackpole, 1967, 4th ed.) 
note, p. 25, that General Claire Chennault, commander of the 
14th Air Force, " ••. Did indeed fly support missions in behalf of 
the retreating French forces." /After the Japanese take-over in 
March,J 
In his The T>-ro Viet-Nams, moreover, Fall cited the memoirs 
of General Lionel-Max Chassin, commander of the French Far East Air 
Force, to the effect that the 14th Air Force provided supplies and 
even fighter support to the French until at least April 26, 1945. 
(New York: 
Praeger, 1967, 2nd revised ed.) n. 10, pp. 463-469. 
In 
both books, hovrever, Fall presents a strong case for the paucity 
of U.S. aid to the French in the 1945-1946 period. 
See also UoS. 
Department of Stat e, Memorandum of Conversation by Assistant Secre-
tary of State Dunn, 19 March 1945, and telegram to Paris 1576 of 
19 April 1945. 
16. 
Russell) op. cit., 975. 
17. 
Russell, op. cit., 91j quoting from Cordell Hull, The Memoirs 
of Cordell Hull, 2 Vols., (New York: Macmillan Co., 1948). 
18. Russell, op. 
• .L 
ClL,. ) pp. 176-177, 573-589· 
19· 
Ibid. , 585, US Dept state, Documentary History ... , op. cit. , B-2. 
20. 
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History ..• , op. cit. , B-1. 
21. 
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History ... ) op. cit. , B-2, p. 
22. 
Russell, 012' cit. , p. 1047. 
23. 
U.S. Department of State, Memorandum by the Director of the Office 
of European Affairs (Matthews) to the State-War-Navy Coordinating 
Committee, May 23, 1945. 
The proposal for a division of respon-
sibility between Chinese Nationalist and British forces was first 
made by General Marshall, head of the Combined Chiefs of Staff) on 
July 18, 1945. After some negotiation with Chiang Kai-shek over 
t 
2. 
the precise dividing line, the British accepted the 16th parallelj 
Truman and Churchill formally agreed to the arrangement on July 24. 
See Foreign Relations of the United States (Potsdam), op. cit., I, 83 
377) 922j and II) 1313, 1319, 1465. 
A-64 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
24. 
25· 
26. 
27· 
28. 
29· 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33· 
34. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
As for the 0 .. S. S., the ranking American offic ial in northern 
Vietnam in 1945, Brigadier General Philip E. Gallagher, has 
attested: 
11 ••• throughout the months before the J'apanese capitu-
lation, O.S.S. officers and men operated behind Japanese lines, 
to arm, lead and train native guerrillas "\-Tho were organized by 
the Vietminh." 
(A situation report, undated, in the Gallagher 
Papers, ~uoted in Bert Cooper, John Killigrew, and Norman LaCharit~, 
Case Studies in Insurgency and Revolutionary Warfare: 
Vietnam 1941-
1954 /Washington, D.C.: 
Special Operations Research Office, The 
American University, 19~7, p. 107·) 
Other sources conclude, how-
ever, that O.S.S. assistance to the Viet Minh-led guerrillas was 
extremely limited, although it gave the Viet Minh the opportunity 
to proclaim that they were part of the Allied effort against the 
Japanese. 
(See Fall, Le Viet-Minh: 
La R~ ubli~ue D~ocrati~ue 
du Viet-Nam [jaris.: 
Librairie Armand Colin, 19 _" 
p. 3 ; Cooper, 
Killigrew, and LaCharit~, op. Cit.) 
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History .•. , op. cit., B-3. 
U.S. Department of State, telegram from Paris 6857, 28 November 1945. 
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History .•. , op. cit., B-4, 
B-6, B-9. 
U.S. Department of State, Political Activities Along the South 
China-Indochina Border (Office of Intelligence Research, Report 
No. 4575, December 29, 1947), 5· 
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History ... , op. cit., B-5. 
U.S. Department of State, Political Activities Along the South 
China-Indochina Border, op. cit.) 5. 
U.S. Department of State, Indochina Since 1939 (Office of Intelli-
gence Research, No. 3602, 25 March 1946), 6. 
i 
u.s. Department of State, Brief on I ssues i n Dispute Between France 
and Vietnam (Office of Intelligence Research, OIR Report No. 4303, 
March 10, 1947), 6. 
I 
I 
U.S. Department of State, Indochina Since 1939 : 
A Factual Survey 
Offic ~ of Intelligence Research, No. 3602, 25 March 1946), Appendix A. 
Appended to the Accords of 6 March were a series of supplementary 
agreenients, among which was a plan for ivithdrmring all French troops 
within five years. 
I 
Ib id ., 7, 11. 
A-65 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
35·· 
36. 
37· 
38. 
39· 
40. 
41-
1~2 • 
43· 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47· 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In a note to the French Ambassador, of 10 April 1946, the Depart-
ment of State confirmed that: 
1I ••• the Franco-Chinese agreement 
completes the reversion of all of Indo-China to French control .... 11 
and that the Comb ined Chiefs of Staff "Offer no objectionll to the 
arrangement. 
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History ... , Ope cit., B-9, B-6. 
The Department of State files contain at least 6 communications from 
Ho in the period September, 1945, to February, 1946; addressed to 
the U.S. Government in his capacity as IIPresident of the Provisional 
Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam ll or as President and Foreign 
Minister of the IIProvisional Government of the Democratic Republic 
of Viet--Namll : 
(1) Letter to President Truman, September 29, 1950 
(confidential; file 851G.00/IO-1845). 
(2) Letter to the Secretary 
of State, October 22, 1945 (from Kunming) desp. 38) October 24, 1945) 
confidential; file 851G.00/IO-2445). 
( 3) Letter to Secretary of 
State, November 1, 1945 (from Chungking, desp. 890, November 26, 
1945, unclassified). 
(4) Letter to President Truman, Qndated ( from 
Chungking, tel. 1948, November 8, 1945, confidential; file 851G. 
QO/ll.845). 
(5) Letter to President Truman, January 18) 1946 ( from 
Chungking, tel. 281, February 13, 1946, confidential; file 740.00119 
PW/2-1346). 
(6) Letter to President Truman, February 16, 1946 
(unclassified file 851G.I0/2-2046). 
Ibid. 
U.S. Department of State, telegram to Saigon 305, December 5, 1946. 
Ellen J. Hammer, The Struggle for Indochina) 1940-1955, (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1966), p. 155. 
Ibid. , p. 186; Buttinger, Ope cit. , II, pp. 676-678. 
Hammer, Ope cit. , p. 190. 
Ibid. 
Ibid. , p. 186. 
." 
Ibid. , p. 19l. 
Ibid. , p. 19~· 
-
Ibid. , p. 193· 
Ibid. , pp. 193-194. 
A-66 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
48. 
Ibid. , p. 
49· 
Ibid. , p. 
50. 
Ibid. , p. 
51-
Ibid. , p. 
52. 
Ibid. , p. 
53· 
Ibid. , p. 
54. 
Ibid., p. 
55· 
Ibid. , p. 
56. 
Buttinger, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
195· 
197· 
195· 
195· 
207. 
204. 
199· 
208. 
°E' cit. , 806-807· 
57. 
Chart is based on contemporary publications of the U.S o Depart-
ment of State, Office of Intelligence Research, together .lith 
Hammer, Ope cit., and Buttinger, Ope cit., passim. 
58. u.s. Department of State telegram to Paris 6586 of 24 December 
1946, CONFIDENTIAL. 
59. u.s. Department of State telegram to Paris 75, 8 January 1947. 
60. u.s. Department of State memorandum for Mr. Acheson, dated 
8 January 1947, subject IIFrench Indochina. II 
61. 
Ibid. 
62. 
State Department telegram 431 to EJnbassy in Paris, 3 February 
1947, SECREI'. 
63. 
Hammer, Ope cit., 202. 
64. 
U.S. Department of State telegram to Paris 1737, 13 May 1947. 
65. 
U.S. Department of State telegram from Paris 3621 of 9 July 1948, 
and telegram to Paris 2637 of 14 July 1948. 
66. 
u. S. Department of State telegram to Paris 33(;8, 30 August 19LfB. 
67. 
U.S. Department of State telegram from Paris 5129, 30 September 194B. 
(;8. 
U.S. Department of State telegram to Paris 145, 17 January 1949. 
A-67 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73· 
74. 
76. 
77· 
78. 
79· 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85· 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
U.S. Department of State telegram to Saigon 77, 10 May 1949. 
UoS. Department of State telegram, Marshall 9741 to Nanking, 
2 July 1948. 
U.S. Department of State, Appraisal of Communist Efforts in South-
east Asia: 
1948 (Office of Intelligence Research Report No. 4778) 
October 12, 1948), 12-13. 
U.S. Department of State Bulletin, Vol. 16 (March 23, 1947), 536. 
Ibid. 
Committee of 'European Economic Cooperation, General Report, Vol. 1 
(U.S. Department of State Publication 2930, 1947), 130 
Congressional Record, Vol. 94, Part VI, 80th Congress, 2d Session, 
7791. 
Charles Wolf, Jr., Foreign Aid: 
Theory and Practice in Southern 
Asia (Princeton : 
Princeton University Press, 1960), 40-52. 
Ibid., 53-54. 
Documents on American Foreign Relations, 1949, 626. 
Memorandum for the Executive Secretary, National Security Council, 
from the Secretary of Defense, dated June 10, 1949, subject: 
Unit ed States Policy toward Asia. 
A Report to the National Security Council by the Executive Secre-
tary on "The Position of the United States with Respect to Asia" 
(NSC l~8/1, December 23, 1949). 
A report to the President by the National Security Council on 
"The Position of the United States with Respect to Asia" (NSC ~.s/2, 
December 30, 1949 ). 
UoSo Department of State, telegram to Saigon 25, January 20, 1950. 
UoS. Department of State, Press Release No. 104, February 1, 1950. 
u.s. Department of state telegram to Saigon 5;:1, February 4, 1950. 
Background Information Relating to Southeast Asia and Vietnam, Com-
mittee on Foreign Relations, March 1966,p. 30. 
86. 
U.S. Department of State, Documentary History ... , op. cit., B-48. 
A-68 
TOP 
SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I 
[ 
I 
I 
1 
J 
1. B. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
THE CHARACTER AND POWER OF THE VIEr MINH 
SUMMARY 
One 'of the recurrent themes of criticism of U.S. policy in Vietnam 
has been that from the end of World War II on, there was a failure to 
recognize that the Viet Minh was the principal vehicle for Vietnamese 
nationalism and that it, in fact, was in control of and effectively 
governing all of Vietnam. 
Evidence on issues like popularity and con-
trol is always some,·rhat suspect--especially when dealing with an exotic 
country like Vietnam at a time when I-That Americans knew about it was 
largely dependent on French sources. 
Nonetheless ) some generalizations 
can be made and supported. 
First, the Viet Minh was the main repository of Vietnamese nationalism 
and anti-French colonialism. 
There ,{ere other such groups promoting Viet 
independence but none were competitive on a country-wide scale. 
It is 
also true that the disciplined, well-orgahized, and well-led Indochinese 
Communist Party was the controlling element in the Viet Minh. 
The ICP 
was not, hm{ever, in the numerical majority either in total membership 
or in leadership posts held. 
This gap between control and numbers can 
be explained by t,w factors: 
(a) 
ICP strategy 'vas to unify nationalist 
elements to achieve the immediate objective of independencej and (b) the 
other components of the Viet Minh were sizable enough to fractionalize 
the whole movement. 
In other words) from World War II on) the ICP was 
strong enough to lead, but not to dominate Vietnamese nationalism. 
Second, the Viet Minh was sufficiently popular and effective to 
turn itself into a Vietnam-wide government that could have extended its 
authority throughout the country after World War II--except for the 
obstacle of reasserted French power, and, to a lesser degree) of indi-
genous political opposition in Cochinchina. 
The Viet Minh was always 
more powerful in Tonkin and Annam than in South Vietnam. 
However, it 
seems likely that in the absence of the French, the Viet Minh through 
its governmental creation, the DRV, would have overridden indigenous 
tribal, religious,. and other opposition in short order. 
Vietnamese nationalism developed three types of political parties 
or movements: 
Reform parties. 
Narrowly based among the small educated Viet-
namese elite, these parties made little pretense at representing the 
masses of the peasantry--except in the ancient mandarinal sense of 
B-1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
paternal leadership. 
In general, they advocated reform of the relation-
ship between France and Vietnam to establish an independent and united 
nation, but would neither sever beneficial bonds with the metropole, nor 
alter drastically the Vietnamese social structure. Members included 
many men of impeccable repute and undoubted nationalist convictions--
among them Ngo Dinh Diem--but also a number of known opportunist and 
corrupt Vietnamese. 
The r eformist parties were further discredited by 
collaboration with the Japanese during World War rr. 
These parties 
formed the basis for the IIBao Dai solution ll to which France and the 
U.S. gravitated in the late 1940's. 
Theocratic parties. 
In Cochj.nchina--and almost exclusively 
there--during the 1930's there emerged religious sects commanding firm 
loyalties of hundreds of thousands of peasants. 
TYro of these--the Cao 
Dai and the Hoa Hao--aspired to temporal as well as spiritual pOl-rer, 
fielded armed forces, and formed local governments. 
They opposed both 
French political and cultural hegemony, and domination by other Vietnamese 
parties. 
Some elements collaborated openly with the Japanese during 
1940-1945. 
Because these parties were of local and religious character, 
any parallel with other Viet political organizations would be inexact. 
These movements accotmt in l arge measure for the distinctive character 
of South Vietnamese nationalism as compared with that of Annam or Tonkin. 
Revolutionary parties. 
The numerous remaining Vietnamese polit-
ical parties fall into the revolutionary category: 
they advocated Viet-
nam's independence from France and some degree of radical reorganization 
of the Viet polity. Their political coloration ranged from the deep 
red of the Saigon-centered Trotskyites (who advocated anti-imperialist 
revolution throughout the world, and within Vietnam, expropriation for 
the workers and peasants) through the l ess violent hues of communism 
and Kuomintang-styled nationalism, to the indistinct, eclectic nationalism 
of the Binh Xuyen criminal fraternity (another Saigon phenomenon). 
Only 
tim of these movements developed a Vietnam-wide influence : 
the Indochinese 
Communist Party (rcp), and the Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNQDD). 
Both 
these parties were troubled throughout their history by factionalism, and 
by repeated ' (French police) purges. 
Both aspired to politicizing the 
peasantsj neither I-rholly succeeded. 
Of the two, the rcp cons i stently 
demonstrated the greater resiliency and popularity, attributable to 
superior conspiratorial doctrine and technique, and to more coherent 
and astute l eadership. 
Both the rcp and the VNQDD figured in peasant 
uprisings in 1930-1931, and 1940-1941. 
Each played a role in the Viet-
namese resi1stance ·against the Vichy French and the Japanese during World 
War II: 
tHe rcp as the nucleus of the Viet Minh, and the VNQDD as the 
principal component of the Chinese Nationalist-sponsored Dong Minh Hoi . 
. i 
The viet Minh--Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi, League for the Inde-
pendence o~ Vietnam--came into being in May, 1941, at the 8th Plenum 
of the Indochinese Communist Party, held in South China. 
rt was formed 
as a lIunited front II organization "\-lith Ho Chi Minh at its head, and was 
B-2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
initially composed of the ICP, Revolutionary Youth League, the New 
Vietnam Party, and factions of the Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNQDD). 
Membership I·ras held open to any other individuals or groups willing to 
join in struggling for "national liberation." The announced program 
of the Viet Minh called for a wide range of social and political reforms 
designed mainly to appeal to Viet patriotism. 
Emphasis was placed on 
an anti-Japanese crusade and preparation for "an insurrection by the 
organization of the people into self-defense corps," not on communist 
cant. 
Though a Kuomintang general originally sponsored the Viet Minh, 
Ho soon became suspect, and in 1942 was jailed by the Chinese. 
While 
he was in prison, probably to offset the Viet Minh's growing appeal, and 
to assure tighter Chinese control of the Vietnamese, the KMT fostered a 
rival Viet "popular front," the Vietnam Revolutionary League (Dong Minh 
Hoi), which was based on the VNQDD, the Great Vietnam Nationalist Party 
(Dai Viet), and a number of smaller groups, but was supposed to include 
the Viet Minh. 
In fact, however, the Dong Minh Hoi never acquired more 
tban a nominal control over the Viet Minh. 
In 1943, Ho ioTaS released 
from prison and put in charge of the Dong Minh Hoi--a status apparently 
conditioned on his accepting overall Chinese guidance and providing the 
allies iolith intelligence . 
But as the war progressed, Ho and the Viet 
Minh drew apart from the Dong Minh Hoi, and the latter never succeeded 
in acquiring apparatus within Vietnam comparable to the Viet Minh's. 
During the war, some Vietnamese political parties collaborated iolith 
the Japanese or the Vichy French. 
These were put at a disadvantage during 
and after the war in competition with the ICP, the Viet Minh, or the 
Dong Minh Hoi--all of which developed an aura of un"\olavering faith to 
resistance against all foreign domination. 
But only the ICP and the 
Viet Minh established their reputations by extensive wartime operations 
among the people of Vietnam. 
In Cochinchina, up until surfaCing in 
v 
April 1945, the ICP continued to operate largely underground and iolithout 
much regard for the Viet Minh mantle; in Annam and Tonkin, hOiolever, all 
ICP undertakings were given Viet Minh identity. 
Throughout Vietnam, the 
ICP initiated patient political action: 
the dissemination of propaganda, 
the training of cadres, the establishment of a network of cells down to 
hamlet level. 
The ICP ioTaS during the war the hard core of the Viet Minh, 
but the bulk of the Viet Minh membership 1{ere no doubt quite unaiolare of 
that fact: 
they served the Viet Minh out of a patriotic fervor. 
The American ·O.S.S. during World War II dealt with the Viet Minh 
as the sole efficient resistance apparatus within Vietnam, depending 
upon it for reliable intelligence, and for aid in aSSisting dOiolned allied 
pilots. 
HOi-leVer, the Viet Minh itself assigned priority to political 
tasks ahead of these military missions. 
The first permanent Viet Minh 
bases were established. in 1942-43 in the mountains . north of Hanoi. 
(J!lly 
after its political netlwrk was "\olell established did it field its first 
guerrilla forces, in September 1943. 
The first units of the Viet Minh 
Liberation Army came into being on December 22, 1944, and there is little 
B-3 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
'TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
evidence of large scale, concerted. guerrilla operations until after 
. March 19h 5· 
At the end of 191~4) the Viet Minh claimed a total membership of 
500,000) of vrhich 200,000 Vlere in Tonkin) 150)000 in Annam, and 150)000 
in Cochinchina. 
The Viet Minh political and military structure was 
significantly further developed in North Vietnam. 
In May 1945, a Viet 
Minh "liberated zone" Vlas established near the Chinese border. 
As the 
wrar drev to a close the Viet Minh determined to preempt allied occupa-
tion, and to fona a government prior to their arrival. 
The Viet Minh 
ability to do so proved better in the north than in the south. 
In 
August 1945) Ho Chi Minh's forces seized povrer from the Japanese and 
Bao Dai in North Vietnam) forced the emperor to abdicate) and to cede 
his povlers to Ho I s Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV). 
In Cochinchina) 
hovrever, the Viet Minh ~rere able to gain only tenuous control of Saigon 
and its environs. 
Nonetheless) when the allies arrived, the Viet Minh 
were the de facto government in both North and South Vietnam: 
Ho Chi 
Minh and his DRV in HanOi, and an ICP-dominated "Committee of the South" 
in Saigon. 
On 12 September 19Lf5, the Brit ish landed a Gurkha battalion and a 
company of Free F;rench soldiers in Saigon. 
The British comm.ander regarded 
the Vietnamese government vrith disdain because of its l ack of authority 
from the French and because of its inability to quell civil disorder in 
South Vietnam . 
Saigon police clashed with Trotskyites) and in the rural 
areas) fighting broke out betl-!een Viet Minh troops and those of Cao Dai 
and Hoa Hao. 
Spreading violence rendered futile further attempts to 
draw together the Vietnamese factions) and prompted the French to impor-
tune the British cormnander to permit them to step in to restore order. 
On the morning of 23 September, French troops overthrew' the Vietnamese 
government after a tenure of only three weeks. 
The official British 
account term~d the French method of executing the coup d' etat "unfortu...l1ate" 
I 
in that they "absolutely ensured that countermeasures Vlould be taken by 
the flietna.d:es:=.7 • ... " 
Vietnamese retaliation was quick and violent: 
over one hundred Hesterners were slain in the first feif days) and others 
kidnapped; fm 26 September) the U.S. commander of the O.S.S. in Saigon 
was killed. 
Thus ) the first Indochina War began j.n Cochinchina in late 
September, 1945) and American blood VIas shed in its opening hours. 
At thal juncture, the ICP in C~Ch~nChina was ina particularly 
vulnerable position. 
The ICP had permitted the Viet Minh to pose as an 
arm of the ~llies,: and had supported cooperation vith the British and 
amnesty fori the French. 
The Party had even u...l1~ertaken, through the 
Committee of the South) to r epress the TrotskYltes . 
But violence under-
mined its a8vocacy of political moderation) of maintaining public order, 
. and of negotiations with the French. 
Further, the ICP in Saigon was . 
assured by lFrench communists that they vould receive no assistance from 
Party breth~en abroad. 
The French coup d'etat thrust conflict upon the 
Vietnamese 'of Cochinchina . 
The question before the communists was how 
to respond; ! the ICP leadership determined that violence vas the sole 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
J 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
recourse, and that to maintain leadership of the nationalist movement 
in South Vietnam they had to make the Viet Minh the most unbending foe 
of compromise .lith the French. 
The situation in all of Vietnam at the end of the war was confused--
neither the French, nor the Viet Minh, nor any other group exercised 
clear authority. 
~fuile the Viet Minh was far and away the single most 
pmrerful Vietnamese organization, and .rhile it claimed dominion over all 
Vietnam, its authority was challenged in the North by the Chinese and in 
the South by the British. 
The French position was patently more tenuous 
than that of the Viet Minh until 9 October 1945. 
On that date, France 
and the UK concluded an agreement whereby the British formally recognized 
French civil administration in Indochina and ceded its occupation rights 
to France sout.h of the 16th parallel. 
This ceding of authority j.n the 
South did not} as a practical matter, ensure French rule. 
With only 
35,000 French soldiers in South Vietnam, the Viet Minh and other parties 
were well·able to contest the French. 
Viet Minh authority in Annam and Tonkin was l ess ambiguous} but by 
no means unchallenged. 
In the North, the salient political fact of life 
for the Viet Minh vas the presence of the Chinese Nationalist Army of 
Occupation numbering 50,000 men. 
Through this presence, the Chj.nese .rere 
able to force the Viet Minh to accommodate Chinese-Viet Nationalists 
within the DRV and to defer to Chinese policy in other respects. 
The 
resultant situation in North Vietnam in the autumn of 1945 is depicted 
in the map on page B_l~l. 
The Viet Minh had to go further still in accommodating the vishes 
of the Chinese. 
In setting up the DRV government of 2 September 1945, 
pro-Chinese, non-Viet Minh politicians vere included, and the ICP took 
only 6 of 16 cabinet posts. 
On 11 November 1945, the Viet Minh leader-
ship vent even further, and formally dissolved the ICP in the interest 
of avoiding "misunderstandings. " 
Even this, hovever, vas not sufficient. 
Compelled by opposition demands, Ho agreed to sc~edule national election9r 
for J anuary of 1946. 
The results of these electlons vere arranged before-
hand . • rith the major opposition parties} and the Assembly thus "elected" 
met on 2 March 1946. 
This Assembly approved a nev DRV government, .lith 
the ICP holding only 2 of 12 cabinet posts. 
By then, France vas ready to pose a stronger challenge . 
French 
reinforcements had arrived in Indochina, so that Paris could contemplate 
operations in North Vietnam as well as in Cochinchina . 
In early 1946, 
the Chinese turned over their occupation rights in the North to France. 
Faced vith increased French military po.rer and Chinese withdrawal, and 
denied succor from abroad, Ho decided that he had no recourse save to 
negotiate with the French. 
On 6 March 1946, Ho signed an Accord vith 
the French providing for French re-entry into Vietnam for five years in 
return for recognizing the DRV as a free state .rithin the French union. 
B-5 
TOP SEC~~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
This Accord taxed Hots popularity to the utmost, and it took all 
Hots prestige to prevent open rebellion. 
On 27 May 1946, Ho countered 
these attacks by merging the Viet Minh into the Lien Viet, a larger, 
more embracing "national front." 
Amity vithin the Lien Viet, however, 
lasted only as long as the Chinese remained in North Vietnam. 
When 
they withdrew a few veeks later, in mid-June, the Viet Minh, supported 
by French troops, attacked the Dong Minh Hoi and the VNQDD, as "enemies 
of the peace," effectively suppressed organized opposition, and asserted 
Viet Minh control throughout North Vietnam. 
But even this ascendancy proved transitory. 
Ho Chi Minh, though 
he tried hard, vas unable to negotiate any durable modus vivendi with 
the French in the -summer and fall of 1946. 
In the meantime, the DRV 
and the Viet Minh were drawn more and more under the control of the 
"Marxists " of the former rcp. 
For example, during the session of the 
DRV National Assembly in Noyember, nominal opposition members vere 
whittled dOl-Tn to 20 out of more than 300 seats, and a fev "Marxists " 
dominated the proceedings. 
Nonetheless, the DRV government maintained 
at least a facade of coalition. 
A chart (pp. B51-55) 
of its leadership 
during 19~· 5-1949 illustrates that through 1949, rcp members remained in 
the minority, and nominally oppositionist VNQDD and Dong Minh Hoi politi-
cians were consistently included. 
Although the Cochinchina war continued throughout 19l~6, with the 
Viet Minh assuming a l eading role in resistance, I-lar in North Vietnam 
did not break out until December, 1946. 
A series of armed clashes in 
November were followed by a large scale fighting in Hanoi in late December. 
The DRV government took to the hills to assume the ' status of shadOlv state. 
The Viet Minh transformed itself back into a semi-covert resistance organ-
ization and committed itself throughout the nation to the military defeat 
of the French. 
During the opening year of the war, 1947, the Viet Minh 
took steps to restore its image as a popular, patriotic, anti-foreign 
move~ent, and again to play down the rcp role in its leadership . 
The 
DRV government 1das reorganized and prominent communists excluded . 
As 
the Viet Minh gathered strength over the years, however, these same 
leaders reentered the DRV government. 
In February 1951, addressing the Congress of the Vietnamese Communist 
Party (Lao Dong), Ho Chi Minh stated that the Communist Party had formed 
and l ed the Viet Minh, and 'founded and ruled the DRV. 
When the French 
colonialists reappeared in South Vietnam and a Nationalist Chinese-
sponsored government seemed in prospect in North Vietnam, Ho averred, 
the Party went underground, and entered into agreements with the French: 
"Lenin said that even if a compromise with bandits \-Tas 
advantageous to the revolution, he would do it .... " 
B-6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
.. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
But HO's explanation notwithstanding, the Viet Minh was irrefutably 
nationalist, popular, and patriotic. 
It was also the most prominent and 
successful vehicle of Viet nationalism in the 1940's. 
To a degree it was 
all{ays non-communist. 
Available evidence indicates, however, that from 
its inception, Ho Chi Minh and his lieutenants of the Indochinese Com-
munist Party conceived its strategy, directed its operations, and channeled 
its energies consistent with their oym goals--as they subsequently claimed. 
Whether the non-communist elements of the Viet Minh might have become 
dominant in different circumstances must be relegated to speculation. 
It seems clear that, as matters developed, all of the non-communist 
nationalist movements--reformist, theocratic, or revolutionary--were too 
localized, too disunited, or too tainted with Japanese or Nationalist 
Chinese associations to have competed successfully vTith the ICP for con-
trol of the Viet Minh. 
And none could compete effectively vlith the Viet 
Minh in gaining a following among Vietnam 's peasants. 
B-7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1. B. 1. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
THE CHARACTER AND POWER OF THE VIET MINH 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
Origins of the Vie t Minh. . . . . . • . . . . . . • . . . . . . . • . . . . . . • . . • . • . . . . . .. B-9 
a. 
Pre-World War' II Vietnamese Political Movements ...•.......... B-9 
(1) 
The Political Situation During the 
1920' sand 1930' s . . . . . . . . . • • . . . • . • . . • . • . . . . . . . . . • . • • . . .. B-9 
The Vietnamese Nationalist Party •.•.....•..•...........• B-ll 
The Primacy of the Indochinese 
B-13 
Cornrnunist Party ........................................ . 
b. 
World War II and the Viet Minh ............................... B-18 
(1) 
Formation of the Independence League, 1941. .........•... B-18 
(2) 
Component Parties and Program ...•• , ............•.•....... B-20 
(3 ) 
Competitive Parties .. :. . ................................ B-22 
(a) 
Dong Minh Hoi . • . . . . • . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . • . . .. B-22 
I (b ) 
Col laborator Parties. .............................. B-23 
I (c) 
Trotskyists ... . ..... . ........ . . . . . . • . . . • . • . . . • . • • •. B-25 
(4) I Viet Min~ Operations in Vietnam ...............•......... B-25 
(5) 
The Liberation of North Vietnam ..................•...••• B-27 
(6) 
The Liberati on of South Vietnam ......•......•.•....••... B-30 
. I 
I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-8 
) 
---
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1.B .1. 
J 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I. B. 
THE CHARACTER AND PO"lfER OF THE VIET MINH 
1. 
Origins of the Viet Minh 
a. 
Pre-World War II Vietnamese Political Movements 
(1) 
The Political Situation During the 1920's and 1930's 
In eighty years of French domination of Vietnam there 
had been no increase in per-acre yield of rice, so that the comparative 
fertility of Vietnam's fields were, in 1940, the 10vlest in the world. y 
Viet population increased at double the expansion in rice production from 
cultivating new land. 
~hus, French contentions that their imperium had 
uplifted the Vietnamese notwithstanding, there is no evidence that they 
i mproved popular diet, or solved the problem of recurrent famine. 
In 
fact, the rural peasants were in 1940 socially disadvantaged in compari-
son with their ancestors, in that the pre-colonial mandarinal society with 
its subsistence economy had better provided for their basic political, 
economic and social needs. 
Moreover, the neomercantilism of France had, 
in fact, given the Ban~ue d'Indochine a key r ole in colonial policy. 
The 
Ban~ue was a virtual French monopoly, nearly as bal eful an influence over 
the Vietnamese as the communists depicted it; at least , with the colonial 
administration, it defended the French economic position through blocking 
Vietnamese social and political mobility. 
Vietnamese entered legitj.mate 
domestic businesses under severe handicaps, and "lere all but foreclosed 
from foreign commerce. 
Few descriptions of pre-World War II Vietnam by 
non-French authors fail to portray a colonialism like that depicted by 
Karl Marx . 
For example, the Austrian-American authority, Joseph Buttinger , 
characterized the state of Viet society and politics in the late 1930's 
as follows: 
"Pauperization was the lot of most peasants and of all 
tenants , not only in overpopulated Tongking and Annam, but also 
in Cochinchina , which was so much richer than the other four 
Indochinese states that it contributed L~O per cent to the general 
budget. 
The economic burdens of French rule, according to a 
contemporary English writer, 'were shouldered principally by the 
rural population, and the fiscal demands, together ,-lith the in-
creasing birthrate, led to a progressive pcmperization of the 
countryside, a process illustrated by the fact that rural in-
debtedness in Cochinchina alone increased from 31 million pias-
ters ~n 1900 to 134 million piasters in 1930 . ' 
i 
",There is, however, no more devastating verdict on the 
failure of the French to combat rural poverty than the dry state-
ment df another French authority on living conditions in Vietnam . 
I 
'It is only i n periods of intense agricultural labor,' wrote 
E. IJerich · in a study published in 1942, "'ihich means during 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-9 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
one-third of the year and particularly during the harvest, that 
the people have enough to eat.' 
liThe peasant ' s painful efforts, wrote an exceedingly tame 
Vietnamese nationalist during the 1920's, are not rewarded with 
sufficient well-being, so he 'dreams of more happiness, of more 
j ustice.' 
There can be no doubt that he did. 
But what the 
moderate nationalists failed to see was that by 1930, a great 
many peasants were ready to proceed from dream to action. 
They 
would nOlV have listened to any party whose leaders vTere ready 
to make the troubles of the poor their chief political concern. 
This, unfortunately, was grasped only by the communists. 
When 
they proclaimed that the struggle for independence could have 
meaning for the poor only if independence aimed at improving 
their social condition, the communists had won the first round 
in their fight for l eadership of the nationalist camp." ~/ 
Communists were, however, not the only Vi etn~~ese political movement 
actively seeking to change the French colonial relationship. 
Three cate-
gories of political forces can be identified: 
Principal Vietnamese Political Movementj) 1920 - 1940 
(with Dates of Activation) 3 
Parties Advocating Reform of the French System 
Constitutionalist Party (1923) 
Vietnam People's Progressive Party (1923) 
Democratic Party (1937) 
Socialist Party (1936 ) 
Theocratic Movements 
Cao Daism (1920) 
Hoa Hao-ism (1939) 
Parties Advocating Revolution and National Independ~ 
Vietnam Nationalist Party (1927) 
Vietnam Revolutionary Party (1927) - disbanded 1930 
NevT Vietnam Revolutionary Pa,rty (1928) - disbanded 1930 
Indochinese Cormnunist Party (1930 ) 
Trotskyist Movement (1931) 
Vietnam Restoration League (1931) 
t 
The reformist parties were strongest in Cochinchina. 
There the French 
administered directly rather than through Vietnamese as in Annam or Tonkin, 
and, apparently f eeling more secure in their control, tolerated in the South 
open Vietnamese political activism prohibited in central and north Vietnam. 
Nonetheless, no reformist movements acquired a popular base, and all vTere 
moribund at the start of World ~var II. 
TOP SECREl' - Sensitive 
B-lO 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The theocratic movements vlere also Cochinchinese phenomena, but, 
unlike the reformist parties, commanded wide popular support . 
Cao Daism 
swiftly took hold in the late 20's and 30's, and became a genuine political 
force among the peasants in Tay Ninh Province (northwest of Saigon) and 
in the Mekong Delta. 
The Hoa Hao movement grew even more rapidly from 
its inception in the late 30's among the peasants of the Delta southwest 
of Saigon. 
The revolutionary parties were, by contrast, concentrated chiefly 
in the North, their more radical and conspiratorial complexion reflectirg 
both necessity -- given the repressive policies of the French and the 
mandarins through vlhom they ruled -- and foreign intellectual influences, 
especially those emanating from China, and from the universities in Hanoi 
and Hue. 
All the revolutionary parties were active among Vietnamese liv-
ing abroad. 
The 'Vietnamese Restoration League was chiefly based in J apan 
(and eventually became the J apanese backed vehicle for Vietnamese entry 
into the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere). 
The remainder were 
·principally Chinese based, and strongly influenced by Sun Yat Sen's 
philosophy, Chia,ng Kai Shek ' s Kuomintang , and Mao Tse Tung's Chinese Com-
munist Party. 
Of the group, only the Indochinese Communist Party and the 
Vietnamese Nationalist Party achieved real political power , but not even 
these were successful in dislodging French control; a brief recounting of 
their failures, hOi-leVer, reveals much concerning the political antecedents 
of modern Vietnam. 
(2) 
The Vietnamese Nationalist Part~ (VNQDD) 
The Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang (VNQDD ) was formed in 1927 
chiefly out of dissatisfaction among young Vietnamese with movements, 
such as the ineffectual Revolutionary Associa.tion and the early communist 
organizations, which were dominated by men of mandarinal of alien intellec-
tual backgrounds. 
The VNQDD prided itself on identification with the 
Vietnamese peasantry, and modeled itself after the Kuomintang: 
cellular 
and covert, advocating Sun Yat Sen's program of "Democracy, Nationalism, 
and Socialism." As the diagram (Figure 1)!2/ 
indicates, the history Of 
the Nationalist Party is one of fragmentation -- both from factional dis-
putes and from French counter-action -- and merger with other movements. 
In a fashion appealing to a people who value historic lineage, the 
Nationalist Party traced its origins to one of the few modern Vietname·se 
national heroes, Phan Boi Chau; to a Viet movement in Yunnan under Phan 
Boi Chau 's disciple, Le Phu Hiep; and to a Kuomintang-oriented Vietnamese 
publishing house ca,lled the Annamese Library. 
The Nationalists initially 
were a Tonkin party, but became allied with the Vietnam Revolutionary 
Party of Annam (and, in a minor fashion, the same party in Cochinchina). 
The relationship never amounted to much more than liaison, and the 
Nationalists remained Tonkin-centered. 
There, however, they acquired 
a significant following, and succeeded in forming a number of cells among 
Vietnamese serving in the French armed forces. 
In 1930 the Nationalist 
Party l eader, Nguyen Thai. Hoc, ordered a mass uprising against the French . 
On February 10, 1930, the insurrection began with a mutiny of troops at 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-ll 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
HIS T O~Y OF THE VIETNP.H NA'.i'IONALlST PARTY 
I 
t'; '; ~ " lSE 
1 _______ ~_:_A_;::_' _____ , 
,J~~ 
NATICo,ALISi 
PARTY 
-----------
TOP SECREl' - Sens it :L-ve--------l 
I 
P~AN 80 I CHAU 
SUPP0ET£t?S 
I 
LE ~HU HI£P 
L SU= cCR:'ER5 
C
R~VOLU,~O';A,Y ~ 
SIN O VIEHU'1 
. 
~ILITARY LEAG UE 
--_. ---
DISSOLVeD 
i?n-Beo {lei} 
B-12 r 
__ 
I~ 
[j
EAG'JE Or 
O;·r-RE.S5EO 
0R I;:"., /, c 
PEOPL[~ 
-"------' 
S!oN iON 
~~THAEJ
' 
I 
REI'OLUTIO~ARY 
PAR1Y 
----1 
;Figure 1 
TOP SECREl' - Sensitive 
1 
!S2S 
1927 
IS28 
'9~ (j 
1932 
IS33 
19:(0 
1942 
1945 
19l!6 
19'17 
1948 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Yen Bay, and spread throughout Tonkin. 
The French reaction was quick, 
efficient and severe. 
Nguyen Thai Hoc was captured and executed, along 
with hundreds of lesser Nationalists; others fled to China. 
By 1932, 
Nationalist Party remnants within Vietnam had been hounded into activity, 
and the Party thereafter centered on the exile community in China. 
By 
1940, in a series of factional struggles, three main branches evolved: 
a pro-Japanese faction called the Great Vietnam Democratic Party (Dai 
Viet Dan Chinh); a faction re-established in Vietnam called the Great Viet-
nam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang ); and a Kunming faction 
under Vu Khong Kanh bearing the original VNQDD name. 
The latter group 
survived the war, and became important in its aftermath. 
(3) 
The Primacy of the Indochinese Communist Party 
The disunity, vulnerability, and meanderings of the 
Nationalist Party -- notwithstanding its relative effectiveness compared 
with most other parties -- stands in contrast with the solidarity and 
resiliency of the Indochinese Communist Party (ICP). 
The main unifying 
factor of the communist movement was Ho Chi Minh, and the coterie of dedi-
cated revolutionaries, most of whom he personally recruited, trained, and 
led. 
But important as was such leadership, doctrine and discipline also 
figured in communist success . 
Ho (then known as Nguyen Ai Quoc ) partici-
pated in the founding of the French Communist Party, and after training 
in Moscow, formed the Vietnam Revolutionary Youth League in Canton, pri-
marily nationalist in announced aims (Figure 2).2./ 
In its journal in 
1926, however, Ho wrote that: 
"Only a communist party can insure the 
well-being of Annam," and he apparently began about that time training 
cadres for covert operations. 
By 1929, some 250 Vietnamese had been 
trained in Canton, and at least 200 had returned to Indochina to undertake 
organizational work; as of that year, some 1000 reported communists and 
collaborators indicated that 10% w'ere in Cochinchina, some 200/0 in Annam, 
and the remainder in Tonkin. §/ 
In 1929 communists sought fusion with 
the New Vietnam Revolutionary Party, and attacked the Nationalist Party 
(VNQDD ) as a Itbourgeois party. " 
That same year, a faction of the Revolu-
tionary Youth League formed an Indochinese Communist Party (Dong Duong 
Cong San Dang), the first to bear the title. In 1930 the Revolutionary 
Youth League, some members of the socialist Nguyen An Ninh Association, 
and the exiled Annam Communist Party j oined with the latter faction into 
first the Vietnam Communist Party, and then -- per Comintern wishes to 
broaden the party to embrace Laos and Cambodia -- a reorganized Indochinese 
Commu..rJ.ist Party, \.,hich 'l<laS recognized by the Comintern. 
In the Nationalist-precipitated violence of 1930, about 1000 ICP mem-
bers led 100,000 peasants in strikes, demonstrations, and open insurrec-
tion. 
In Ho's home province of Nghe An, peasant soviets were set up, 
l andlords were killed, and large estates broken up -- methods so violent, 
so tainted with pillage and murder, that the Comintern objected that they 
were not in consonance with Itorganized violence It of Marxist doctrine. 1.1 
Again, however, French counteraction was swift and telling. 
French police 
destroyed overt apparatus of the ICP in Vietnam during 1930 and 1931, and 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-13 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
""'------0 
V J~: I::'~ 
RES~C~~:10~ 
(P ,,:~c V£et) 
I 
VIEHM-I 
I 
R!:~TO?ATIOS 
L""·t~ 
ViEI~t.K 
REVOL:JTIO~A;;r 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3_3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
~'IiA'iPOA 
fllLIHRY 
ACAD(KY -u
----
v I E. 7tUd·~ 
REVOLUT IOI:ARY 
(d~~ldritE 
I---~~-;:--
I 
P.~\'OLUTIC"ARY 
l ________ :_~~~-~-~--------~ 
B-l~-
1921 
ORI E~TAL 
] 
'--______ 
W_O __ 
q~_
- E_P._S~~ 
. 1925 
_ 
SCHOOL 
1926 
1927 
19Z3 
1929 
1930 
!93C-3 1 
Figure 2 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
on their request, Ho Chi Minh was arrested by the British in Hong Kong. 
Attempts at party reorganization in 1932 were met by renewed police re-
pression, and not until 1933 were communists again permitted political 
activity of any sort. 
The party, however, did revive, establishing a 
new foothold in more permissive Cochinchina, under Tran Van Giau 
(Figure 3). §/ 
Tran there formed the League Against Imperialism, a 
front organization specifically non-violent in its program designed to 
attract support from the political center and right. In 1935, following 
the Comintern Seventh World Congress, the ICP centered itself on Saigon, 
and launched an Indochinese Congress "Democratic Front," paralleling the 
communists ' Popular Front movement in metropolitan France. 
Almost i mme-
diately, h01vever, Trotskyite elements, advocating "permanent revolution," 
split with the ICP leadership, and bega.n to press an independent, more 
revolutiona.ry line. 
The Trotskyites were divided within themselves into the "Struggle" 
Group and the "October" Group, differing mainly in the degree to which 
·they countenanced cooperation with the ICP. 
In 1937 a Trotskyite candi-
date, Tu Thu Thau, together with an ICP leader, Nguyen Van Tao, was 
elected to the Saigon Municipal Council. 
By 1939 Trotskyite elements 
had dra1m together into one party, and that year a Trotskyite slate won 
80% of votes cast in a Cochinchinese election -- a severe defeat for the 
ICP which led Nguyen Van Tao to set up another communist splinter part;y. 
1he divisions within the communist movement of Vietnam during the 
1930's, as well as the ICP willingness to subordinate its doctrinal ab-
horrence of both the French and the bourgeoisie for short term goals, 
are evident in the following report on "The Party ' s Line in the Period 
of the Democratic Front (1936-1939)" submitted by Nguyen Ai Quoc (alias 
of Ho Chi Minh) in July, 1939: 
"1. 
For the time being, the Party cannot put forth too 
high a demand (national independence, parliament, etc.). 
To 
do so is to enter the Japanese fascists' scheme. It should 
only claim for democratic rights, freedom of organization, free-
t 
dom of assembly, freedom of press and freedom of speech, general 
amnesty for all political detainees, and struggle for the legali-
zation of the Party. 
"2. 
To reach this goal, the Party must strive to organize 
a broad Democratic National Front. 
This Front does not embrace 
only Indochinese people but also progressive French reSiding 
in Indochina; not only toiling people but also the national 
bourgeoisie . 
"3. 
The Party must assume a wise, flexible attitude "¥lith 
the bourgeoisie , strive to draw it into the Front, win over 
the elements that can be won over and neutralize those which 
can be neutralized. 
We must by all means avoid leaving them 
outside the Front, l est they should fall into the hands of the 
enemy of the revolution and increase the strength of the re-
actionaries. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-15 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DEVELOPMENT OF CO Tll]VIUI';IST Of-{GAtJIZAj:I01;S IN INDOC a INA, 
1931 - , ~5 
/ 
Figure 3 / 
I' 
I 
:"~" .. 
',' 
- -- - - - - - - -
~ - - -
~ - - - - -- - - - - - "- - -
c~'"~_} 
Er R 0 KEN U f> 
£l Y F REI: C 11 
P OL ICE ACT I 0 H 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
~ 
I 
-
-
1-
REO R G A n I Z A T I 0 H 
I 
-'--~ 
r-'-II-D-OC~H-'-~~ 
G 
I;GUYEH 
CCf~'\U ~IST 
I'A~ TAO 
fA?TY 
ORG f. ~ I Zt.T I O'l 
- \ . -
_____ _ --.:-r_ 
_._----
-- - - - -- -
-
-, 
~ --------, 
'ST RU GGLE" 
GROUP 
------ - -- - - --
C OiH~~~ I ST-
TROTsn:ST 
CCf:F lI CT 
------,--------
- - - .- - -
- - - - --
TR OT~KYITES 11' 11; 
COI'TRO L OF 
"STRt:GG LE' 
GPOt;P 
--------L 
[ 
FOU R-'-, 
H ---'---, 
I NTE RNA; I OSA L 
PART 'f 
---------'- --\:: -=---
POLICE DISSO LV E OP.GA ti IZATIO Ii S 
- - - [- -~~-~~~]-
-: -- - - - - - - - - - -
I N01CH I /;ESE 
COfl,ilJN 1ST 
' 
P,',R TY 
--~-- '.--
I 
PI,RTY CI:;:,O LHO 
r 
'
. __ 
STRUGGLE 
_ 
GRCUP 
~
NTE RI;~i : ~~1 
CCi \C:U ~ I ST 
Le AGUE
, 
I 
SECRET -
Sensi~ive 
1933 
i~35 
1936 
1937 
1935 
19 l1 i 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"4. 
There cannot be any alliance with or any concession 
to the Trotskyite group. 
We must do everything possible to 
l ay bare their faces as henchmen of the fascists and annihilate 
them politically. 
"5. 
To increase and consolidate i ts forces, to widen its 
influence , and to work effectively, the Indochinese Democratic 
Front must keep close contact 'with the French Popular Front 
because the latter also struggles for freedom , democracy, and 
can give us great help. 
"6. 
The Party cannot demand that the Front recognizes its 
leadership. It must instead sho\v itself as' the organ which 
makes the greatest sacrifices, the most active and loyal organ. 
It is only through daily struggle and work that the masses of 
the people acknowledge the correct policies and leading capacity 
of the Party and that it can win the l eading position. 
"7. 
To be able to carry out this task, the Party must un-
compromisingly fight sectarianism and narrow-mindedness and 
organize systematic study of Marxism-Leninism in order to raise 
the cultural and political l evel of the Party members and help 
the non-Party cadres raise their level. 
We must maintain close 
contact with the French Communist Party . 
"8. 
The Central Executive Committee must supervise the 
Party press to avoid technical and political mistakes . 
(E.g., 
in publishing comrade R' s biography, the LaO-Dong revealed his 
address and his origin, etc. It also published without comment 
his letter saying that Trotskyism is a product of boastfulness, 
etc.)." 2.1 
I 
In August , 1939, however, the Hitler-Stalin alliance was contracted, and 
t he following month all varieties of communists , both domestic and colonial, 
were declared anathema by the French. 
In Vietnam, communist organizations 
were once more thoroughly destroyed by police action, the Trotskyites 
suffering particularl y . l!}) 
Once the covert segments of the ICP survived . 
That the ICP endured the French purges of 1930 - 1932 and 1939 - 1940 
t estifies to its strength, for the 'same attacks emascul ated the VNQDD and 
all other revolutionary Vietnamese political parties . 
At the outset of 
World War II, the I CP enj oyed a virtual monopoly on organized Vietnamese 
nationalis~ , a position attributable to (1) ruthlessness of the French 
in eliminating competition ; (2) superior communist discipline , training, 
and hence, survivability; (3) inherently better communist strategy and 
t actics for balking the French colonial administration and mobilizing popu-
l ar opinio~s; and (4) French t olerance of "popular front" communists gener-
ated by the ascendancy of the Left in metropolitan France during the mid -
30's. 
The French, by denying political expression to moderate Vietnamese 
nationalists, polarized native political sentiments, and invited popular 
support of the more vehement and r adical solutions proffered by the Iep. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-17 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
b. 
World War II and the Viet Minh 
(1) 
Formation of the Independence League, 1941 
The fall of France in June 1940 vms followed i mmediately 
by a Japanese demand for permission to occupy Indochina. 
On 19 June 1940, 
Japan presented the French the first of a series of ultimatums, which cul-
minated, after some ungraceful maneuvering by the Vichy government, in 
an order signed September 2, 1940, by Marshall Peta in, directing the 
colonial administration to negotiate terms by which Japanese armed forces 
might enter Indochina and use military bases there. 
Within the month, 
after demonstrations by the J apanese Navy off the Tonkin coast, and an 
actual invasion of Tonkin from China by the J apanese Army, the terms sought 
by the J apanese were forthcoming. 
The French ruled in Vietnam as hosts 
to the J apanese until 1945, but the presence of Japanese bayonets rendered 
their sovereignty largely titular. 
The Vichy administration under Rice 
Admiral J ean Decouz developed a peculiarly Indochinese French nationalism 
which dignified its client status, extolled France's tutel age functions 
for the Vietnamese , and foreclosed any concessions vlha-tever to native 
aspir8.tions for political independence. 
Above all, i t attempted to pre-
serve the fiction that the Japanese had been stationed in Indochina with 
its permission . 
Admiral Decoux held that: 
"A country is not occupied if it keeps its own army free 
in its movements, if its government and all the wheels of its 
administr8.tion function freely and vd thout impediment , if its 
general services and particularly its police and security forces 
remain firmly in the hands of the sovereign authority and out-
side of all foreign interference ." -gJ 
But, the very emphasis the Vichy government placed upon its "freedom" dra-
matized among Viet pa.triots the extent of its collaboration. It was soon 
evident that the Decoux regime served the purposes of Japanese policy, and 
was "free" only to the degree the Japanese chose. 
Early in 1941 J apan 
countenanced a Thai invasion of Laos and Cambodia. 
French military act~)n 
was successful in halting the Thais, but the Japanese , requiring Thai co-
operation for their drive into Malaya, forced the French to grant Thailand 
all the t erritory it sought. 
On May 6, 1961, the first of a series of 
Franco-Japanese commercial treati es was signed, which had the effect ~f 
diverting from France to Japan all the exploitive gains from French colonial 
enterprise , without Indochina's receiving in return such goods as it nor-
mally received in trade from France. 
Japanese armed forces were granted 
full run of the country, and after December 7, 1941, Decoux declared Indo-
china part of the "Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere." 
The Japanese entry into Indochina kindled, in 1940 and 1941, Vietnamese 
insurrections against the French, who now appeared more reprehensible and 
vulnerable than ever. 
Too, some Vietnamese nationalists had long looked 
to the Japanese to liberate their nation. 
The communists were apparently 
undecided whether to risk another premature insurrection. 
While it appears 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-18 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
that the Central Committee of the ICP may have actually ordered subordinate 
echelons to refrain from violence, communists , first in Cochinchina, and 
then in Tonkin, led armed uprisings . 
The results were disasterous for 
the rebels. 
The J apanese, who probably encouraged the revolts to the extent 
they could, stood aside while the French reacted svriftly and savagely to 
crush the Vietnamese . ~ Numerous ICP and other nationalist leaders died 
in the fighting , or in the harsh ministrations of French colonia l j ustice 
which followed. 
The outcome of the r ebellions of 1949 and 1941 was thus 
yet another French purge, exile of Vietnamese nationalist movements . 
While 
small scale covert operations continued in Vietnam, party headquarters were 
forced to move abroad, mostly to Nationalist China. 
I n 1946, the Vietnamese 
government pUblished a tract which acknowledged its debt to China: 
"Thus it came to pass that southern China became the by-word 
of all Vietnam revolutionists. It was the birthplace of the 
Vietnam revolutionary movement , the base from where were directed 
all revolutionary activities 'beyond the border ' -- on Vietnam' s 
own terri tory." D./ 
Chinese motives for sponsoring the Vietnamese nationalists included a de-
sire to acquire intelligence of Japanese forces on their southern flank, 
and to tie down Japanese through sabotage and other operations i n Indochina ; 
there may have been a longer range interest in political influence over 
postvrar Indochina . 
In May, 1941, the head of the ICP, Nguyen Ai Quoc -- the person l ater 
to be called Ho Chi Minh -- convened the Eighth Plenum of the ICP Central 
Committee to approve the forming of a new united front organization to 
which Vietnamese patriots wishing to resist the J apanese and oppose the 
French might rally. 
The Party meeting was followed by a "congress" of 
Vietnamese nationalists vrho had r ecently escaped from their homeland, and 
others who had been in exile for years; there were also r epresentatives 
of the "national liberation associations" of workers , peasa,nts , soldiers, 
women, and youth -- most of them ICP organized and dominated. 
The "con-
gress" adopted the r ecommendations of the ICP l eaders , and established 
t 
the Vietnam I ndependence League, Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi , which 
became knovm as the Viet Minh. 
Nguyen Ai Quoc VlaS named Genml Secretary 
of the new Lea,gue , and most of its key positions were assigned to ICP ~em­
bers. 
Nguyen Ai Quoc i ssued a l etter on the occasion, including the follow-
ing appeal: 
"Compatriots throughout the country ! 
Rise up qUickly! 
Let 
us follo\·T the heroic exampl e of the Chinese people ! 
Rise up quickly 
to organize the Association for National Sa,lvation to fight the 
French and the J apanese . 
"Elders ! 
"Prominent personalities ! 
"Some hundreds of years ago, when our country was endangered by 
the Mongolian i nvasion, our elders under the Tran dynasty rose up 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-19 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
indignantly and called on their sons and daughters throughout 
the country to rise as one in order to kill the enemy. 
Finally 
they saved their people from danger, and their good name will 
be carried into posterity for all time . 
The elders and prominent 
personalities of our country should follow the example set by 
our forefathers in the florious task of national salvation. 
"Rich people, soldiers, workers, peasants, .intellectuals, 
employees , traders, youth, and women who warmly love your 
country! 
At the present time national liberation is the most 
important problem. 
Let us unite together! 
As one in mind and 
strength ,ve shall overthrow the Japanese and French and their 
jackal s in order to save people from the situation between boil-
ing water and burning heat. 
"Dear compatriots! 
"National salvation is the common cause to the whole of 
our people. 
Every Vietnamese must take part in it. He who has 
money will contribute his money, he "Tho has strength will contribute 
his strength, he who has talent vrill contr ibute his talent. 
I 
pledge to use all my modest abilities to follow you, and .am ready 
for the last sacrifice. 
"Revolutionary fighters! 
"The hour has struck! 
Raise aloft the insurrectionary banner 
and guide the people throughout the country to overthro\v the Japanese 
and French! 
The sacred call of the Fatherland is resounding in 
your ears; the blood of our heroic perdecessors vlho sacrified 
their lives is stirring in your hearts! 
The fighting spirit of 
the people is displayed everywhere before you! 
Let us rise up 
quickly! 
United vlith each other , unify your action to overthrow 
the Japanese and the French. 
of the 
! 
"Victory to Viet-Nam's Revolution! 
I 
"Victory to the World's Revolution!" W 
(2) 
Component Parties and Program 
I 
~oJowing 
I 
.) 
I 
The Viet Minh was originally an "anti-fascist" league 
Viet nationalist groups: 
The Ne"T Vietnam Party (Tan Viet Dang) 
The Vietnam Revolutionary youth League (Viet Naill Tbanh 
Nhien Cach Menh Dong Chi Hoi) 
Vietnam Na tione"list Party (VNQ.DD) (Only certain factions -
of this party elected to join the Viet Minh) 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-20 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The several "National Liberation Associations" 
The Indochinese Communist Party (ICP) 
Beginning in October, 1940, the Central Committee of the ICP had vri thdravll1 
its specifically communist slogans 
(~., "To confiscate landlords' lands 
and distribute it to the tillers," was toned down to "Confiscation of the 
land ovmed by traitors for distribution to the poor farmers. II) and had be-
gun instead to emphasize "national liberation."!:5./ ' Within the Viet Minh, 
"national liberation" became central to the Party program, but the ICP 
from the outset dominated the league. According to Vo Nguyen Giap, the 
Party set political goals for the Viet Minh at the expense of its historic 
"anti-feudal task," but necessarily: 
"To rally the different strata of the people and the national 
revolutionary forces in the struggle against the main enemy, that 
is the French and Japanese fascist imperialists ..• 
lilt is precisely for this reason {emphasis on 'national libera-
tioril that within a short period, the Viet Minh gathered together 
the great forces of the people and became the most pO'l'Terful politi-
cal organization of the broad revolutionary masses ." 1§j 
By 1943, the Viet Minh was in fact attracting a broad spectrum of national-
ists and intelligentsia, as well as extending its organization steadily 
among the peasants. 
A 1946 official history presented this formulation 
of its program at that time: 
"At a conference in 19L~3, delegates of all anti-fasci t revo-
lutionary organizations adopted the following political program: 
(1) Election of a constituent assembly to work out the constitu-
tion for a free Indo-China on the basis of adult suffrage; (2) 
Restoration of democratic liberties and rights, including freedom 
of organization, press and assembly, freedom of belief and opinion, 
the right to property, the right of 'l'Torkers to strike, freedom of 
t 
domicile and freedom of propaganda; (3) The organization of a 
national army; (4) The right of minorities to self-determination; 
(5) Equal rights for \vomen; (6) Nationalization of banks belong-
ing to fascists and the formation of an Indo-Chinese national 
bank; (7) The building up of a strong national economy by the 
development of native industry, communications, agriculture and 
commerce ; (8) Agricultural reforms and the extension of cultiva-
tion to fallo\~ lands; (9) Labor legislation, including the intro-
duction of the eight-hour working day and progressive reforms in 
social legislation; (10) Development of national education and 
culture . 
IIIn the international sphere the program stands for the 
revision of unequal treaties and an alliance with all democratic 
nations for the maintenance of peace. 
More important for the 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-21 
~ I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
anti-Japanese war, however·, is the immediate program of action 
which is: 
(1) Organization of the masses -- workers, peasants, 
women, and youth -- for the anti-fascist struggle . 
This has al-
ready attained promising successes. 
(2) 
Preparation of an in-
surrection by the organization of the people into self-defense 
corps. 
(3) The formation of guerrilla bands and bases 'which 
will assume greater importance as we gradually approach the time 
of country-wide military action. ,n ill 
(3) 
Com~etitive Parties 
(a) 
Dong Minh Hoi 
From the outset, the Chinese were suspicious of the 
Viet Minh. 
In 1942, they arrested Nguyen Ai Quoc, and ·imprisoned him. 
In October, 1942, more than one yee,r after the founding of the Viet Minh, 
the Kuomintang sponsored a second "united front" of Vietnamese nationalists 
named the Vietnam Revolutionary League (Viet Nam Cach Menh Dong Minh Hoi). 
Colocated with headquarters of the Viet Minh in Kvrangsi Province, China, 
Liuchow, the Dong Minh Hoi -- as it came to be known -- included: 
The Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNDD) 
The Vietnam Restoration League (Viet Nam Phuc Quoc 
Dong Minh Hoi ) 
The Great Vietnam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Quoc 
Dan Dang ) 
The Viet Minh 
The Liberation League (Giai Phon~ Hoi) 
The Dong Minh Hoi was launched with the official sanction of Marshall Chang 
Fa-kuei, the quasi-autonomous Chinese warlord; its initial program was ex-
pressly modeled after the Kuomintang's Three People's Principles of Sun 
Yat Sen, and its paramilitary organizations were established with a view 
to close cooperation with the Nationalist Army. 
However, after more than 
a yea.r in prison, Nguyen Ai Quoc "\'18.S released by the Chinese -- perhaps 
on Chang Fa-kuei's orders, and without knowledge or sanction of Chiang 
Kai-Shek's headquarters -- and installed, under the nevI alias of Ho Chi 
Minh, as Chairman of the Dong Minh Hoi. 
The Viet Minh alone profitted by 
this duality of leadership. 
Only in the person of Ho Chi Minh, and in 
Luichow itself, was there any merger of the ti-IO "united front" organiza-
tions. Afield, and especie,lly in Tonkin, they competed -- and occasionally 
fought -- with one another. 
The Dong Minh Hoi acquired only modest political and military pOl'Ter 
in Vietnam, and became a significant political factor there only after 
Chinese Nationalist forces occupied Tonkin in late 1945. 
On March 28, 1944, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-22 
. ......-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
a "Provisional Republican Government of Vietnam" was proclaimed in LuichmV', 
China, with Viet Minh officials occupying only a minority of positions in 
the government. ~ But in Vietnam, the Viet Minh formed the only effec-
tive and extensive resistance movement. 
(b) 
Collaborator Parties 
Both the French and the Japanese sponsored Vietnamese 
political parties. 
On the whole, the Japanese enjoyed significantly greater 
success in manipulating the Vietnamese, and they thereby emasculated Decoux's 
colonial administration. 
Through direct support of the theocratic movements, 
such as the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao, and a variety of nationalist political 
parties, they maintained the potential for popular dissidence in balance 
,·lith available French force. 
As a result, large portions of Vietnamese 
territory, especially in Cochinchina, were vacated by the French to Viet-
namese rule . 
J apanese sources reported during World War I I that the more 
important of the collaborating Viet nationalists .. ,ere in two groups: 
The 
Great Vietnam Nationalist Association (Dai Viet ~uoc Dan Hoi ) -- an out-
growth of rightist elements within the VN~DD;-and the Vietnam Restoration 
League (Viet Nam Phuc ~uoc Dong Minh Hoi) -- based on the nationalist groups 
which had been in exile in Japan. 
According to Japanese r eports, in Annam 
and Tonkin, these included: 
Great Vietnam Party (Dai Viet ) 
(1 ) 
The Great Annam People ' s Party (Dai Viet ~uoc Dan Dang), which 
at its height -- about 1940 -- had about 25,000 members; but 
as a result of the pressure of the French authorities in Indo-
china, it is now somevlhat r educed . 
Its members are chiefly from 
t he low.er clases, stUdents or boy scots , and its influence extends 
from the provinces of Ha Dong, Hai Duong, Bac Ninh and Central 
Annam to the Laos District . 
(2 ) 
The Great Annam Democratic Party, which was disbanded in 1941 
as a result of official pressure but r eformed in 1942 and consists 
chiefly of intellectuals and men of letters; its members number 
about 2,000. 
This was probably the section of the Vietnam 
Nationalist Party known as the Dai Viet Dan Chinh and directed 
by Nguyen Tuong Tam. 
(3) 
Three other groups whose total membership is two or three thousand . 
One of these smaller groups was probably the youth Patriots . (Than 
Nhien Ai Quoc ), l ed by Vo Xuan Cam, which has been described a;--
a terrorist party that maintained a flovl of violent anti-French 
propaganda. 
Another vTas the Servants of the Country (Phung Xa 
~uoc Gioi), directed by Pham Dinh Cuong . 
Restoration League (Phuc ~uoc ) 
(1) 
The Annam National Party, consisting of a volunteer corps , a 
civilian section, and a military section . 
The volunteer corps, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-23 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
which is the principal. element , counts 1,500 in the north, 3,000 
in the center , and 5,000 in the south and has influence amongst 
business men, officials, and i ntellectuals. 
(2) 
The Vietnam Patriots ' Party (Viet Nam Ai Q,uoc Dang), made up of 
doctors, lawyers and intellectuals in the liberal professions 
and having latent power among young intell ectuals. 
(3) 
The National Socialist Party (Dai Viet Q,uoc Xa), having about 
2000 members and its chief sphere of influence in the light 
industry towns of Haiphong and Hanoi. 
This party yTaS directed 
by Tran Trong Kim, late premier of the Bao Dai government , and 
is said to have been inspired by the Japanese Military Police 
and Intelligence Organization ( K~ei Tai ) to recruit Vietnamese 
f or the puppet military forces. 19 
In Cochinchina, the Restoration League yTaS preeminent : 
(1) 
(2) 
Restoration League 
The Vietnam National Independence Party (Viet Nam Q,uoc Gia Doc 
Lap Dang), founded by Tra,n Van An, Nguyen Van Sam,}i()van Nga, 
and Ngo Tan Nhon. 
Some of the elements of the dissolved Vietnam 
Revolutionary Party (Viet Nam Cach Menh Dang), which had been 
f ounded in 1939, joined the nevi organization. 
The Party was 
markedly pro-Japanese in orientation. It favored collaboration 
with the J apanese Army and the adherence of Vietnam to the 
Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. 
The Vietnam Patriots ' Party (Viet Nam Ai Q,uoc Dang), a group 
of intellectuals and students-.-- -- - -- --
The Great Vietnam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Q,uoc Dan Dang ), 
an outgrowth of the Cochinchina Vietnam Nationalist Party, 
consisting of pro-Japanese elements . 
(4) . The Vietnam National Party (Viet Naill Q,uoc Gia Dang ), a minor 
political group. 
(6) 
The youth Justice Association (Thanh Nhien Nghia Dong Doan ), 
a minor youth group. 
The youth Patriots (Thanh Nhi.en Ai Q,uoc ), the southern branch 
of a terrorist youth group. 
Elements of this southern group 
created an organization knovm as the Vietnam Democratic Party 
(Viet Naill Dan Chu Ngia Dang). 
The Hoa Hao Buddhist Sect (Phat Gi.ao Hoa Hao), also known as 
the Vietnam Independence Restoration Party (Viet Nam Doc Lap 
Van Dang ), a militant Buddhist sect led by Huynh Phu So . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-24 
(8) 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The Great Religion of the Third Amnesty (Dai Dao Tam Ky Pho Do), 
a Cao-Daist sect led by Tran Quang Vinh, the principa~subordi­
nate of the Cao-Daist Pope, Pham Cong Tac. 
The Cao-Daists had 
been furnished arms by the Japanese and were used as an auxiliary 
police force throughout Cochinchina. ~ 
Whatever short term advantages these grou·ps gained vis-a-vis the Vichy 
French, however , collaboration vlith the Japanese had the longer run effect 
of discrediting a significant number of Vietnamese nationalists, putting 
their movements at particular disadvantage in postwar competition "\-lith 
the Viet Minh, which preserved its aura of unwavering faith to resistance 
against all foreign domination. 
(c) 
Trotskyists 
In Cochinchina radical communists survived, and 
as the war progressed, gained a following concentrated in Saigon. 
In 1944 
the "October" Group announced the forming of the International Communist 
League, and in March, 1945, issued a manifesto condemning the "Stalinists" 
of the ICP who supported the Allies, and the "feudalist" collaborators 
w·ith the Japanese: 
. "The future defeat of Japanese imperialism will set the 
Indochinese people on the road to national liberation. 
The 
bourgeoisie and feudalists who cravenly serve the Japanese rulers 
today, will serve equally the Allied imperialist states . 
The 
petty-bourgeois nationalists, by their aimless policy, will 
also be incapable of leading the people tOvTards revolutionary 
victory. 
On the working class, which struggles independently 
under the flag of the Fourth International, will be able to 
accomplish the advance guard tasks of the revolution. 
"The Stalinists of the Third International have already 
abandoned the working class to group themselves miserably vTi th 
the 'democratic ' imperialisms. 
They have betrayed the peasants 
and no longer speak of the agrarian question. If today they 
march vii th foreign capitalists, in the future, they will help 
the class of national exploiters to destroy the revolutionary 
people , in the hours to come." ?1J 
The Trotskyite "Struggle" Group also re-emerged in Ma.y, 1945, to resume 
its rivalrYI-lith the "October" faction, but both parties advocated world 
revolution, I a worker-peasant government, a.rming of the people and general 
expropriati6n of land and industry. 
Their principal significance was to 
debilitate the ICP in Cochinchina, and to impair the effectiveness of the 
Viet Minh there. 
I 
I (4) 
Viet Minh Operations in Vietnam 
I 
The ICP, at the heart of the Viet Minh, communicated to 
the League the lessons it had painfully learned in the uprisings of 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-25 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1930-31 , and 1940- 41: 
(1) however eager the people were to take up arms, 
i nsurrection had to be correctly timed in order to exploit both maximum 
confusion in enemy ranks and the fullest support from the non-committed ; 
(2) little faith could be placed on defectors from enemy forces - - reli-
ance had to r est rather "chiefly on the great masses of the people"; (3) 
bases for the support of operations had to be carefully prepared before-
hand. ~ According to its own histories, the ICP began in 1941 to pre-
pare for a general uprising in Vietnam. 
In Cochinchina, up until April 
1945, the ICP continued to operate largely underground and without much 
regard for the Viet Minh mantle; in Tonkin, however , all ICP undertakings 
were given Viet Minh identity. 
Throughout Vietnam, the ICP initiated 
patient political action: 
the dissemination of propaganda, the training 
of cadres , the establishment of a network of cells down to hamlet l evel. 
The Central Committee of the ICP adopted this four point program in 1941: 
"1. 
Develop new' organi za tions among the people, and consolidate 
those which exist within the Viet Minh. 
2. 
Expand organizations into the cities. 
3. 
Or gani ze the minor ity peo'ple s wi thin the Viet Minh . 
4. 
Form small guerrilla groups. " ?:J.! 
The Viet Minh assigned priority to political tasks ahead of mi'litary missions . 
Cadres were r epeatedly impressed with the essentiality of a properl y pre-
pared political and material base for guerrilla 'Harfare . 
Even where the 
latter vIas countenanced , they were enj oined to put "reliance on the masses , 
conti nual growth, extreme mobility, and constant adaptation. "?:'!.±/ 
In the 
mountainous region of North Vietnam above Hanoi the first permanent Viet 
Minh bases were established in 1942-1943 . 
Then followed shadow goverD~ent 
by Viet Minh agents, and in September , 1943, after the people he,d been 
well organized, the first locally recruited guerrilla forces were fromed 
under Viet Minh auspices . 
Not until December 22, 1944, was the first unit 
of the Viet Minh Liberation Army created, but there is little evidence of 
concerted guerrilla operations until after March, 1945; by that time the 
underground organization was pervasive . 
As of the end of 1944, the Viet 
Minh claimed a membership of 500,000, of which 200,000 were in Tonkin, 
150,000 in Annam, and 150,000 i n Cochinchina.?:2J 
The aim i'TaS for each 
village to have a Viet Minh committee , responsive to a hierarchy of com-
mi ttees; in most instances vThere the village committee existed , it was 
in a position to challenge the government authority. According to Giap , 
by 1945 the Viet Minh was the de facto government i n many areas: 
"There were regions in which the whole masses t ook part 
in organizations of national salvation, and the village Viet 
Minh Committees had, as a matter of course, full prestige 
among the masses as an underground organization of the r evo-
lutionary power ." ?:§} 
On 9 March , 1945 , the J apanese overturned the Vichy r egime in Indo-
china , and set up the Emperor of Annam, Bao Dai, as the head of a state 
declared independent of France, but participating i n the Greater East Asia 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-26 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Co-Prosperity Sphere. 
This unification of Vietnam by the faltering 
J apanese under the ineffectual Annamese Emperor opened new political 
opportunity for the Viet Minh~ 
On April 6, 1945, the ICP Central Committee 
directed the forming of a shadow government throughout Vietnam, to extend 
to every echelon of the society, prepared to mobilize the whole people 
for w'ar. 
In May, 1945, a Viet Minh "liberated zone" was established near 
the Chinese border. 
Whatever may be said for the distortion of the historical record by 
communist historians to magnify the importance of the Viet Minh, it is 
fact that the American O.S.S. during World War II dealt with the Viet Minh 
as the sole efficient resistance apparatus within Vietnam, for intelligence 
and for aid in assisting downed allied pilots.?:1/ 
It also seems clear 
that in terms of popular reputation in Vietnam, no Viet political movements 
save the ICP and the Viet Minh added to their stature for their \'rartime 
activities . 
(5) 
The Liberation of North Vietnam 
As the war drew to a close, the Viet Minh proved to be 
as adroit strategically as it had sho'l-red itself on the t actical level --
or, as Truong Chinh, the Secretary General of the ICP was careful to point 
out in 1946, the ICP proved to be adroit. According to Truong Chinh, on 
August 13, 1945, the Party, informed of Japan's collapse, decided to pre-
empt Allied occupation of Vietnam, and hurriedly convened a Viet Minh congress 
that had been pending since June: 
"During the historic Congress , the Indochinese Communist 
Party advocated an extremely clear policy: 
to lead the masses 
in insurrection in order to disarm the Japanese before the 
arrival of the allied forces in Indo-China; to wrest po\'rer from 
the Japanese and their puppet stooges and finally as the people's 
power, to welcome the allied forces coming to disarm the Japanese 
troops stationed in IndO-China." ?:§) 
A possibly more accurate record -- since it jibes with other accounts and 
alludes to spontaneous local uprisings in advance of Party's "order for 
general revolution" -- '\vas published by the DRV in September, 1946: 
"These epoch-making developments prompted the Viet Minh 
Party to convene without further delay the National Congress. 
A revolutionary committee was crated and the general revolution 
was o~dered on the night of August 13, i mmediately after the 
news df J apan's unconditional surrender. 
I 
",On August 16, the National Congress opened at Tan Trao, 
a 10cO:1j,ty in Thai Nhuyen province, in the liberated zones. 
Sixty !representatives from all parts of the country came to 
learn /additional details on the order for the General Revolu-
tion. 
The home and foreign policies of the Revolutionary 
I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-27 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Government "Tere mapped out· and the Viet Nam people's Liberation 
Committee , which became l ater the Provisional Government of the 
Viet Nam Democratic Republic, vTas created. 
"At this historical gathering, the Viet Minh Party l aid 
dOvTD a clear-cut program which bore on the following points : 
a) to disarm the J aps before the entry of Allied forces into 
Indochina.; 
b) to wrest the power from the hands of the enemy; 
c) to be in a position of authority when receiving the Allied 
Forces. 
"In some areas, the order for the general revolution was not 
received. Acting on their own initiative', members of the Viet 
Minh Front ordered a general mobilization and l ed the population 
into the fight for power. 
Thus, on August 11, our compatriots 
of Ha Tinh took up arms against the J apanese fascists while 
uprisings also took place at Quang Ngai. 
liOn August 14 and 15, our forces seized numerous enemy advanced 
positions in the vicinity of the l ibera,ted zones. 
liOn August 16, with the news of the Japanese capitulation, 
millions of people throughout the country rose up to the occasion 
and a general attack on Japanese barracks and military establish-
ments began . 
liOn August 17-18, huge demonstrations took place i n the 
capital city of Hanoi. 
The fight for pOvTer effectively started 
here, on the 19, vTi th the l ocal militia forces going over to the 
Revolutionists' side. 
Spearheaded by youth formations , the peo-
ple's army under the command of the Viet Minh forced their way 
into the compounds of the Home Ministry Building. 
Governor Phan 
ke Toai had already fled with his closest collaborators. 
The 
Tran' trong Kim puppet government promptly gave way vThile at the 
former capital of Annam, Emperor Bao Dai signed his act of abdi-
cation in the presence of r epresentatives of the Viet Minh Central 
Headq,uarters . 
"Thus, a new Power came into being, as the people's Revolu-
tionary Government was officially proclaimed and viaS given the . 
unq,ualified s'upport of the entire population. 
"A few days later , members of the National Liberation Com-
mittee met in session in Hanoi . 
In view of the changed situation, 
the New POvTer was re-organized and a provisional Government which 
included several non-party members was established with Ho Chi 
Minh as its president . II ?:2../ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-28 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ho Chi Minh issued an "Appeal for General Insurrection" following the 
August 16 conference: 
" ... This is a great advance in the history of the struggle 
waged for nearly a century by our people for their liberation. 
"This is a fact that enraptures our compatriots and fills 
me with great joy. 
"However, we cannot consider this as good enough. 
Our 
struggle will be a long and hard one. 
Because the Japanese are 
defeated, we shall not be liberated overnight. 
We still have 
to make further efforts and carryon the struggle. 
Only a united 
struggle will bring us independence. 
liThe Viet Minh Front is at present the basis of the struggle 
and solidarity of our people. Join the Viet Minh Front, support 
it, make it greater and stronger! 
"At present, the National Liberation Committee is, so to 
speak, in itself our provisional government. 
Unite around it 
and see to it that its policies and orders are carried out 
throughout the country! 
"In this way, our Fatherland ,qill certainly win independence 
and our people "l-rill certainly win freedom soon. 
"The decisive hour in the destiny of our people has struck. 
Let us stand up "lith all our strength to free ourselves! 
"Many oppressed peoples the world over are vying with each 
other in the march to win back their independence. 
We cannot 
allmq ourselves to lag behind. 
"Forward! 
Fon-lard! 
Under the banner of the Viet Minh Front, 
move forward courageously!" 3..9..1 
The hapless Bao Dai -- the first Vietnamese to govern a nominally 
~~l ited , independent nation in nearly a century -- on August 18, 1945, 
i.spatched to General de Gaulle of France the following poignant and 
!r0phetic message: 
"I address myself to the people of France, to the country 
of my youth. 
I address myself as well to the nation's leader 
and liberator and I "l-rish to speak as a friend rather than as 
Head of State. 
"You have suffered too much during four deadly years not 
t o understand that the Vietnamese people, who have a history 
of tvrenty centuries and an often glorious past, no longer wish, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-29 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
can no longer support any foreign domination or foreign administra-
tion. 
"You could understand even better if you were able to see 
what is happening here , if you were able to sense this desire 
for independence which has been smoldering in the bottom of all 
hearts, and which no human force can any longer hold back. 
Even 
if you were to arrive to re-establish a French administration 
here, it would no longer be obeyed; each village would be a nest 
of resistance , every former friend an enemy, and your officials 
and colonists themselves would ask t o depart from this unbreathable 
atmosphere. 
"I beg you to understand that the only way to safeguard French 
interests arid the spiritual influence of France in Indochina is 
to recogni ze fra,nkly the independence of Vietnam and to r enounce 
any idea of r e-establishing French sovereignty or administration 
here in whatever form it may be. 
"You would be able to listen to us so easily and become our 
fri ends if you would stop aspiring to become our masters again. 
"Making this appeal to the well recognized idealism of the 
French people and the great wisdom of their leader, we hope that 
peace and the joy vlhich has r ung for all the people of the world 
will be guaranteed equally to all people who live in Indochina, 
'native as well as foreign." W 
De Gaulle never r eplied; the message was in any event moot, because within 
a week Bao Dai formally ceded his powers to the Democratic Republic of 
Vietnam, and thereaft er France was faced in North Vietnam not by the 
Francophile ~andarin-king, but by Ho Chi Minh, the implacable professional 
revolutiona~y -- dedicated nationalist-communist. 
(6) 
The Libera.tion of South Vietnam 
The overturning of Japanese power in Cochinchina follO\'led 
a separate course. 
Bao Dai' s government had waited until August 11.r, 1945 
to proclaim the incorporation of Cochinchina into a united Vietnam, but 
this move c~me much too late to have any impact. 
The first effective steps 
toward consolidating the disunited Vietnamese political groups in the South 
was undertalken by the Trotskyist "Struggle" faction and formerly collabora-
tionist parities, who merged on August 14, 1945, to form a "United National 
Front" (Mat Tran Quoc Thong Nhut). 
Participants included the Cao Dai League, 
the Hoa Hao, Sect, and the Buddhist League . 
The United National Front adopted 
the Trotskyist platform, and directed its energies principally against 
I 
Bao Dai's representatives in Saigon . 
The Viet Minh seems to have delayed 
until 24 August to launch its program in Cochinchina, apparently moving 
at that time in response to the seizure of power by the Viet Minh in Annam 
and Tonkin. 
In the meantime, the ICP, led by Tran Van Giau, quietly seized 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-30 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
power. 
On 25 August 1945, the Viet Minh sponsored a meeting at which a 
government entitled "Provisional Executive Committee of the Southern 
Vietnam Republic
lt was formed. 
The Committee of the South; though domi-
nated by Tran Van Giau and other members of the ICP, purported to repre-
sent both the Viet Minh and the United National Front, and to be the 
southern arm of Ho Chi Minh's Hanoi government. 
The United National 
Front was represented at the 25 August meeting , but formal negotiations 
for an alliance between the Viet Minh and the Front did not commence until 
30 August. 
The following is purported to be a transcript of the proceed-
ings of this meeting, following a report by Tran Van Giau as Chairman of 
the Executive Committee of the South: 
"Huynh Phu So (Hoa Hao leader) - 'Will Mr. Giau let us know 
what groups formerly secretly collaborated with the Viet Minh, 
and later publicly participated in it?' 
"Tran Van Giau - 'In Nambo (Cochinchina ) during the under-
ground stage, these were the parties in the Viet Minh Front: 
the Indochinese Communist Party, the New Vietnam Democratic 
Party (Tan Dan Chu Dang), the Youth for National Liberation 
(Than-Nien Cuu QUoc) , the officials for National Liberation 
(Quan-Nhan Cuu Quoc), the Vietnam National Party (Viet-Nam 
Quoc Cia Dang), and now the United National Front. ' 
"Tran Van Thach (Trotskyist t'Struggle'2 l eader ) -
'vlhen was 
the Executive Committee established and who chose it? Will Front 
policy be followed and will there be con~unication with the Front? 
Adn since this assembly is held today, would the Government act 
in line with the Assembly, or is this the only meeting to be 
held?' 
"Tran Van Giau -
'Now, I will answer Mr. Thach. 
The establish-
ment of the Executive Committee was not my sole decision .
. It "Tas 
established some time ago in order to take over the government. 
The Executive Committee is only a temporary one, pending the 
t 
national election. 
In the interim, no one is willing to t ake 
power or obey orders. Although Mr. Thach's questions 'was not 
fully explained, I can tell \vha t is in his mind. 
He would like 
to ask why a man like himself did not have a position in the 
government . 
Isn't that so, Mr. Thach? 
I repeat that this 
Government is only a temporary one. 
Later on when we have the 
general elections, if he is capable , Mr. Thach needn't worry 
about not having a seat in the Government . 
As for the work of 
the parti es , between you and me, we will meet again.' 
"Huynh Van Phuong (Intell ectual Group) -
'Due to the cir-
cumstances that now face us, the United National Front felt that 
there should not be two fronts in the country. 
For this r eason, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-3l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the United National Front called all parties and.groups to meet 
together and selected Phan Van Hum, as its representative, to 
negotiate with the Viet Minh in order to fuse the tvlO fronts 
into one. 
'After negotiating, Mr. Hum returned and reported that 
the Viet Minh has refused to dissolve into the United National 
Front. 
They state that the Viet Minh is already a consolidated 
front in the eyes of the nation and has fought against Japanese 
imperialism. 
Today, in order to unite our strength, the United 
National Front has to affiliate with the Viet Minh. 
'Since the Viet Minh view point was sound, after hear-
ing Mr. Hum's views., the United National Front affiliated with 
the Viet Minh ... ' 
"Tran Van Giau -
'The Viet Minh does not wish to race for 
power. If a man is able, no one will stand in his vmy . 
The 
United National Front r epresents many parties and groups which 
are affiliated to the Viet Minh .•. ,II ~ 
Although the 30 August meeting produced no formal merger, on 7 September 
1946 the Viet Minh was able to announce the forming of a "national bloc 
committee" with the United National Front . It was Tran Van Giau's Com-
mittee of the South which was the de facto government in Saigon when the 
British occupation forces arrived. 
I 
I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-32 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1.B.2. 
J 
I. B. 2. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
TABLE OF CO~ryENTS 
2. 
The Democratic Republic of Vietnam...... .. . ..•.. .... .. ........... B-33 
a. 
Establishment of the Republic. ............................... B-33 
b. 
Short-lived Independence in Cochinchina .•...... .............. B-36 
c . 
Nationalist Goverr1ment in North Vietnam, 1945-1946........... B-40 
(1) 
The Government of 2 September 19l~5...................... 
B-~'O 
(2) 
The Government of 6 March 1945.......................... B-46 
(3) 
Chinese Withdra,val...................................... B-47 
( 4 ) 
The Government of 3 November 1946....................... 
B-~9 
2. 
The Democratic Republic of Vietnam 
a. 
Establishrnent of the Republic 
t 
On 26 August in a ceremony at Hue, the Emperor Bao Dai re-
linquished his pOvTer to Ho Chi Minh 's representatives. 
He spoke of "mighty 
democratic forces in the north of Our Realm," and of apprehension that' 
"conflict behTeen the North and the South should be inevitable ." 
To avoid 
such conflict, and to deny an invader opportunities to capitalize on inter-
nal struggle, he would assume the status of "free citizen of an independent 
country ." 
Bao Dai called upon "all parties and groups, all classes of 
society as 'Idell as' the Royal Family to strengthen and support unreservedly 
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in order to consolidate our national 
independence." JJ.I 
Bao Dai ado'pted the name Vinh Thuy, and accepted the 
title of "Supreme Political Adviser" to Ho Chi Minh 's government. 
On 2 September 1945 -- the day Japan signed the surrender instrument 
Ho proclaimed the foundation of a ne,., state, issuing the follO\ving "Declara-
tion of lhdependence of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam": 
~OP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-33 
r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"All men are created equal; they are endowed by their Creator 
with certain unalienable Rights; among these are Life, Liberty, 
and the pursuit of Happiness. 
"This immortal statement was made in the Declaration of 
Independence of the United States of America in 1776. 
In a broader 
sense, this means : All the peoples on the earth are equal from 
birth, all the peoples have a right to live, to be happy and free. 
"The Declaration of the French Revolution made in 1791 on 
the Rights of Man and the Citizen also states: 
'All men are 
born free and with equal rights, and must always remain free and 
have equal rights.' 
"Those are undeniable truths. 
"Nevertheless, for more than eighty years, the French i mperi-
alists, abusing the standard of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, 
have violated our Fatherland and oppressed our fellow citizens. 
They have acted contrary to the ideals of humanity and justice . 
"In the field of politics, they have deprived our people of 
every democratic liberty. 
"They have enforced inhuman Im<ls; they have set up three 
distinct political regimes in the North, the Center, and the 
South of Viet-Nam in order to "rreck our national unity and pre-
vent our people from being united. 
"They have built more prisons than schools. 
They have 
mercilessly slain our patriots; they have drowned our uprisings 
in rivers of blood. 
"They have fettered public opinion; they have practiced 
obscurantism against our people. 
I i 
"To weaken our race they have forced us to use opium and · 
alcohol. 
'lIn the field of economics, they have fleeced us to the 
backbone, impoverished our people and devastated our land. 
,jTheY have robbed us of our rice fields, our mines, our 
forests, and our raw materials. 
They have monopolized the issu-
ing of bank notes and the export trade. 
I 
"They have invented numerous unjustifiable taxes and reduced 
our people, especially our peasantry, to a state of extreme 
I 
poverty. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-34 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"They have hampered the prospering of our national bourgeoisie; 
they have mercilessly exploited our workers . 
"In the autumn of 1940, when the Japanese fascists violated 
Indochina's territory to establish new bases in their fight against 
the Allies, the French imperialists went down on their bended 
knees and handed over our country to them. 
"ThUS, from that date, our people were subjected to the 
double yoke of the French and the Japanese. 
Their sufferings 
and miseries increased. 
The result was that, from the end of 
last year to the beginning of this year, from Q,uang Tri Province 
to the North of Viet-Nam, more than two million of our fellow 
citizens died from starvation . 
On March 9 Li94i7, the French 
troops were·disarmed by the Japanese. 
The French colonialists 
either fled or surrendered, showing that not only were they in-
capable of "protecting" us, but that, in the span of five years, 
they had twice sold our country to the Japanese . 
"On several occasions before March 9, the Viet Minh League 
urged the French to ally themselves with it against the Japanese . 
Instead of agreeing to this proposal, the French colonialists 
so intensified their terrorist activities against the Viet Minh 
members that before fleeing they massacred a great number of 
our political prisoners detained at Yen Bay and Cao Bang. 
"Notwithstanding all this, our fellow citizens have always 
manifested toward the French a tolerant and humane attitude . 
Even after the Japanese Putsch of March, 1945, the Viet Minh 
League helped many Frenclliuen to cross the frontier, rescued 
some of them from J apanese j ails , and protected French lives 
and property. 
"From the autumn of 1940, our country had in fact ceased 
to be a French colony and had become a Japanese possession. 
t 
"After the Japanese had surrendered to the Allies , our whole 
people rose to regain our national sovereignty and to found the 
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. 
"The truth is that we have wrested our independence from 
the Japanese and not from the French. 
"The French have fled, the Japanese have capitulated, 
Emperor Bao Dai has abdicated. 
Our people have broken the chains 
which for nearly a century have fettered them and have won inde-
pendence for the Fatherland. 
Our people at the same time have 
overthrmm the monarchic r egime that has reigned supreme for 
dozens of centuries . 
In its place has been established the 
present Democratic Republic. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-35 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"For these reasons, we, members of the Provisional Government, 
representing the whole Vietnamese people, declare that from now 
on we break off all r elations of a colonial character with France; 
we repeal all the international obligation that France has so far 
subscribed to on behalf of Viet-Nam, and Ttle abolish all the special 
rights the French have unlawfully acquired in our Fatherland. 
"The whole Vietnamese people, animated by a common purpose, 
are determined to fight to the bitter end against any attempt 
by the French colonialists to reconquer ~h e ir country. 
"We are convinced that the Allied nations, which at Teheran 
and San Francisco have acknowledged the principles of self-
determination and equality of nations, will not r efuse to ac-
knowledge the independence of Viet-Nam. 
"A people who have courageously opposed French domination 
for more than eighty years, a people who have fought side by 
side with the Allies against the fascists during these last 
years, such a people must be free and independent . 
"For these reasons, we, members of the Provisional Govern-
ment of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, solemnly declare 
to the world that Viet-Nam has the right to be a free and indepen-
dent country -- and in fact it is so already. 
The entire Viet-
namese people are determined to mobilize all their physical and 
mental strength, to sacrifice their lives and property in order 
to safeguard their independence and liberty." W 
b. 
Short-lived Independence in Cochinchina 
September 2, 1945, found South Vietna..m in profound political 
disorder. 
The successive collapse of French, then Japanese pOTtleI', follo''led 
by the dissension among the political factions in Saigon had been accom-
panied by Ttlidespread violence in the countryside . 
The Cao J)ai set up a 
state at Tay Ninh; the Hoa Hao established a capital in Can Tho; jacquerie 
flared, and a number of rural officials and landlords were murdered . 
On 
September 2, violence in Saigon took the lives of a French priest on the 
threshold of the Cathedral , several other French, and a number of Vietnamese ; 
French homes were sacked, and an atmosphere of fear-ridden tension descended 
upon the city. 
On 12 [september 1945, the first British troops arrived in Saigon --
a Gurkha battalion; they were accompanied by a company of Free French soldiers. 
General Douglas D. Gracey, commanding, arrived on 13 September. 
Prior to 
his departure from India , Gracey had announced that : 
I 
liThe question of the government of Indochina is exclusively 
French . 
Civil and military control by the French is only a matter 
of \'leeks. " 35.1 
, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
·B-36 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
It appears that Gracey's instructions from the Allied Command in Southeast 
Asia explicitly limited his mission to the disarming of the Japanese, and 
certainly did not require him to undertake revision of the Vietnamese 
political system.]§/ 
But in fact, General Gracey used his troops and 
his position to overturn the Committee of the South. 
Neither communism nor 
Viet nationalism seems to have concerned the British commander . 
On 
10 September , the Viet Minh had accepted a reorganization of the Committee 
of the South in whjch Tran Van Giau was replaced as Chairman by Phan Van 
Bach, a prominent independent nationalist, and ICP members occupied only 
four of thirteen Committee seats. 
Gracey apparently regarded the Viet-
namese government with disda in, if not contempt , not because of its 
political complexion, but because of its lack of authority from the French, 
and because of the civil disorder over vlhich it presided. 
The British 
commander ordered the Japanese to assist in maintaining order, and directed 
the disarming of Vietnamese ; both directives were ignored, but added to 
the mounting tension. 
The attitude of the occupation forces reinforced the position of the 
Trotskyites who had denounced the Viet Minh, the ICP, and the Committee 
of the South as a "bourgeois-democratic government, even though the com-
munists are now in power," and decried any attempts to cooperate with the 
Allies. 
The Trotskyite International Communist League called for the arm-
ing of the people, and incited the populace against the British. 
Beginning 
on 12 September, the Vietnamese police in Saigon launched a violent cam-
paign to suppress the Trotskyites , in which many Trotskyite l eaders were 
killed. 
In the rural areas, fighting broke out between Viet Minh troops 
and the forces of the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao. 
The spreading intra-Viet 
violence rendered futile further attempts to draw together the Vietna~ese 
factions, and heightened apprehension among Westerners in Saigon. 
On 17 September 1945, the Committee of the South called a general 
strike to protest the Allied lack of cooperation, and arrested some sixteen 
French. 
The French then importuned Gracey to permit them to step in to 
restore order . 
On 19 September, the French "Commissioner" for Cochinchina, 
Cedile, announced that there would be no negotiations with Vietnamese 
nationalists until civil order was restored. 
On 20 September, General 
Gracey suspended all Vietnamese newspapers, and took over the Vietnamese 
police force. 
On 21 September, martial law was declared, outlawing all 
demonstrations, and the bea,ring by Vietnamese of any iveapon whatsoever, 
including bamboo rods. 
On 22 September, the British fre ed some 1400 French 
parachutists that had been incarcerated outside Saigon by the Japanese, 
and these promptly descended on the city to beat Vietnamese wherever they 
could lay their hands on them. 
On the morning of 23 September , French 
troops occJpied the police stations, the post office, and other public 
buildings, and began to arrest Vietnamese politicians and public officials, 
although mEjmbers of the Committee of the South escaped. 
The official British 
account noted that: 
I 
"It was indeed unfortunate that the manner in which this 
coup d'etat was executed together with the behavior of the 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-37 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
French citizens during the morning of Sunday, 23 September, 
absolutely ensured that countermeasures "Tould be taken by the 
Annamites LVi etnames~7. 
The more emotional of the French 
citizens , who, after all, had suffered considerably at the hands 
of the Annamites during the past few months, unfortunately took 
this opportunity of taking "That reprisals they could . . Annami tes 
were arrested for no other reason than that they were Annamites ; 
their treatment after arrest, though not actively brutal, was 
unnecessarily violent." ]]} 
The following day, the Vietnamese struck back: 
the economic life of 
Saigon was paralyzed by strikes, and that night groups of Vietnamese --
principally a gangster sect called the Binh Xuyen -- began a series of 
attacks on munic~pal utilities. 
On 25 September, in an assault through 
a French residential district , over one hundred Westerners were killed, 
and others carried off as hostages; on 26 September, the U.S. commander 
.of the O. S.S . in Cochinchina was killed. 
Thus, the Indochina War began 
in Cochinchina in late September, 1945, and American blood was shed in 
its opening hours. 
The Committee of the South issued a statement deploring the British 
actions: 
"Suppression of the press, which was unanimously defending 
the independence of Vietnam, prevented us ... from controlling 
and directing public opinion at a time when the mob was already 
exasperated by provocations of the French ... The British Army, 
to accomplish its mission of disarming the Japanese forces, had 
no need t o disarm our police force and suppress our government 
as it did. 
Yet we have demonstrated by our actions that our 
government is most cordial in its desire to lend every possible 
assistance to the British Army in the accomplishment of its 
task. II 38/ 
At that juncture , the ICP in Cochinchina '·Tas in a particularly vulntra-
ble position. 
The ICP -- the core of the Viet Minh -- had permitted the 
Independence League to pose as the arm of the Allies, and had supported 
cooperation with the British and amnesty for the French. 
The Party had 
even undertaken, through the Committee of the South, to repress the Trot-
skyites. It was apparent that advocacy of political moderation, public 
order, and negotiations with the French -- by the ICP, by the Viet Mi~~, 
or by the Committee of the South -- was quite futile. 
Further, the ICP 
was apparently assured by French communists that they would received no 
assistance from Party brethren abroad. 
An American correspondent in 
Saigon was sho'im a document dated 25 September 1945, which: 
" ... advised the Annami te LVietnamesi/ Communists to be sure, 
before they acted too rashly, that their struggle 'meets the 
requiremen~of Soviet policy. ' It warned that any ' premature 
adventures ' in Annamite independence might 'not be in line with 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.B-38 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Soviet perspectives. ' 
Th~se perspectives might well include 
France as a firm ally of the USSR in Europe, in which case the 
Annamite independence movement would be an embarrassment. 
There-
fore, it urged upon the Annamite comrades a policy of 'patience. ' 
It advised them in particular to wait upon the results of the 
French elections, coming up the following month, in October, 
when additional Cow~unist strength might assure the Annamites 
a better settlement . 
In the meantime, it baldly proposed that 
an emissary be sent not only to contact the French Communist 
Party but also the Russians 'in order to acquaint yourselves 
with the perspectives of coming event. '" J2J 
Whether the circumstances were propitious or not, conflict had been 
thrust upon the Vietnamese of Cochinchina. 
The question before the com-
munists there was how to respond, and apparently the Partly leadership 
determined that violence I'las the sole recourse, and that to regain leader-
ship of the nationalist movement they had to make the Viet Minh the fore-
most proponent of 'var, the most unbending foe of compromise with the French. 
General Gracey, on the urgings of Amniral Lord Mountbatten's Allied Command, 
m~de a determined effort to effect a compromise with the Viet Minh, and 
succeeded in obtaining a truce on 2 October. 
But this broke down quickly 
in the face of truculence on both sides. 
French reinforcements under 
General Leclerc began pouring into Saigon, bolstering French resolve. 
A representative from Ho's Hanoi government arrived to buttress the Viet 
Minh's position with tales of Viet Minh ascendancy in Annam and Tonkin. 
The French sought to negotiate on the premise that they would rule, and 
allolv some Viet participation; the Viet Minh demanded return to the status 
quo prior to 22 September, and eventual French evacuation. 
On October 9, 
1945, France and the U.K. concluded an agreement in London in which the 
British formally recognized the French civil administration in Indochina 
as the sole legitimate authority south of the sixteenth parallel. 
Foreign 
Minister Ernest Bevin described to the House of Commons of Vietnamese 
disorder and looting, and of the difficulties presented by clashes bet'ileen 
French troops under Gracey's command and Vietnamese forces. 
Britain, he 
an...nounced, would assist in transporting to Vietnam enough French troops 
to permit them to take over from Gracey, and that in the interim British 
policy w·ould support "close and friendly cooperation between the British· 
and French commanders." '!!9J 
On 11 October , the truce broke dO'iTn, and 
fighting resumed. 
On 25 October , the French under General Leclerc thrust 
southl'Jard from Saigon to VlY Tho, the temporary capital of the Committee 
of the South, and, victorious there, to the northwest into Tay Ninh, where 
they subdued the Cao Dai. 
The Viet Min]} opened a guerrilla campaign '''hich 
greatly slowed the French, and demonstrated almost at once that neither 
French air power nor armor would suffice for pacification against that 
determined foe. 
The eminent French journalist , Philippe Devillers, who 
accompanied Leclerc's initial forays, wrote that: 
"From this time on the work of pacifying the country re-
vealed an aspect it vlould never lose again: 
to be forever put 
in question. 
The Viet Minh vlould suddenly start shooting at 
night at a village protected by one of our posts ... to pull 
B-39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
defenders to one side ~vhile on the other set fire to the houses 
and kil.led all suspicious persons. If we departed, believing 
a region pacified, they would arrive on our heels and the terror 
would start again. 
There was only one possible defense: 
to 
multiply the posts, to fortify them, to arm the villagers, and 
to train them for a coordinated and enlightened self-defense 
through a thorough job of i nformation and policing. 
"But this required men and weapons . 
What was needed was 
not 35,000 men (of which Leclerc was then disposed) but 100,000, 
and Cochinchina was not the only problem." }gj 
c. 
Nationalist Government in North Vietnam, 1945-1946 
(1) 
The Government of 2 September 1945 
The salient problem other than Cochinchina facing the 
French in the fall of 1945 was the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. 
The 
Hanoi government of Ho Chi Minh claimed dominion over all of Vietnam, 
but as far as French challenge to its authority was concerned, ruled in 
fact only in Annam and Tonkin. 
1iw DRV was neither wholly Viet Minh nor 
communist composition. 
Despite the vigor and initiative of the Viet Min~, 
the salient 'political fact of life in North Vietnam ~vas Chinese Nationalist 
army of occupation, and the Chinese presence had forced Ho Chi Minh and 
the Viet Minh to accommodate Chinese-backed Viet Nationalists, and defer 
to Chinese policy in other respects. 
The numbers of Chinese ''lho entered North Vietnam is not known precisely, 
the totals having been obscured not only by i nadequate reports, but by 
the Nationalists' use of Tonkin for passage of troops from Yunnan and 
Kwan~si en route to other parts of China. 
French estimates ran as high 
as 180,000, but the Chinese occupation forces per se probably numbered 
about 50,000.!J5j 
Even f'elver foreign troops would have gravely overbur-
dened North Vietnam, where because of a bad crop year, and war-disturbed 
commerce, famine was rampant. 
Most of the Chinese troops were ill-
disciplined and poorly-equipped, living, perforce, off the l and. 
Their 
exactions of the peasantry stirred the traditional animosities of the 
Vietnamese for the Chinese -- resentments untempered by gratitude to the 
Chinese as liberators, since the Vietnamese believed they had already 
been liberated by the Viet Min~ . 
And the transgressions of the Chinese 
troops were matched by the Chinese high command; the warlords promptly be-
gan to plu:rder North Vietnam. 
The Chinese dollar was made l egal t ender 
at an exorbitant r ate of exchange with the Vietnamese piastre , Ivhich 
. 
exacerbateJ an already serious i nflation, and opened new vistas for the 
black market. 
Chinese profiteers began large scale buying of French and 
Vietnamese enterprises and real estate. ~ 
I 
As the Chinese forces marched into North Vietnam, they ousted local 
Viet Minh governments , and replaced them with VNQDD, and Dong Minh Hoi 
groups; Phuc-~uoc (Restoration League ) groups seized power elsewhere. 
TOP SECPillT - Sensitive 
B-40 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
." 
ZO 
<r'" 
Z:::i 
.. n 
.... (It 
'g-
c.nZ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR1~ - Sensitive 
Backed by Chinese troops, and drawing on Chinese funds, the VNQDD and the 
Dong Minh Hoi opened newspapers, and launched a political campaign against 
the Viet Minh and the DRV government. 
The resultant situation in North 
Vietnam in autumn, 19J+5, is depicted in Figure 4. 
1 
A 
c 
NORTH 
VIETNAM 
8 {1f OlEN BIEN PHU 
~~ 
\ 
LEGEN D "---_ __ 
IQ_t:;:J_.~~.c:I~~P_C3 
r· ~ IZONES HELD BY THE VIET-MINH 
11111:11111111111111111 ZONES HELD BY TH E PHuc-ou8c 
W/W! ZONES HELD BY TH E DONG-MINH-HOI 
1
,:lzONES HELD BY THE V.N.a.D.D. 
I 
ILOCAL NEUTRAL ADMINISTRATION 
*" Chinese Nationalist Garrisons 
N 
s 
Map of the political situation in N01·th Vietnam in Septembe1'-OctobeT 1945. 
FIGURE 4 
B-4l 
t 
Source: 
Cooper,Killigrew, and LaCharite' 
Case .Studies in Insurgency and 
' 
Revolutiona 
~varfare: Vietnam 
1941-195 
vTashington: SORO, 1961.~ ) , 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The r ealities of' the Chinese presence alone required Ho Chi Minh t.o 
use circumspection in dealing with rival nationalist groups. 
Why the 
Chinese did not folloH .through, and simply oust Ho's government in favor 
of' a VNQDD/Dong Minh Hoi coalition i s not knoHn. 
It appears that venality 
played a part -- Chiang Fa Kuei and other warlords Here direct benefici-
aries of an official DRV "gold week" in September, 1945, in which the state 
appealed to the citizenry for scraps of gold as "a contribution to the 
f'inance of national defense." W Allegedly this campaign produced some 
800 pounds of gold and 20 million piastres, and for it the DRV received 
from the warloards, besides toleration, weapons the J apanese had in their 
possession -- a reported 40,000 arms, including mortars, artillery pieces, 
and 18 tanks. ~ 
. 
But Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh Here constrained to go well beyond 
bribery . 
In setting up the government of 2 September 1945, they had been 
carefuly to include non-Viet Minh politicians, and to hold ICP representa-
·tion to 6 to 16 cabinet seats. 
On 23 October , the Viet Minh signed a pact 
with a dissident faction of the Dong Minh Hoi, purportedly in the interest 
of' the "common struggle against the aggressive attempts of' the colonial 
French, in order to defend the liberty and independence of' the Democratic 
Republic of' Vietnam. "!i§j 
But other elements of the Dong Minh Hoi and 
the VNQDD persisted in their attack on the Viet Minh, making a particular 
point of' communist domination. 
Ho Chi Min..h and the ICP then decided on a drastic move. 
Follov-ring 
a three day ICP conclave of' 9 to 11 November, 1945, the ICP leadership 
issued the folloHing declaration: 
"1. 
Whereas, in consideration of' the given historical 
situat.ion, both internationally and internally, the present 
moment is precisely an exceptional occasion for Viet Nam to 
reconquer her unitary independence ; 
"2. 
Whereas, in order to complete the Party's task in this 
immense movement of' the Vietnamese people's emanicipa,tion, a 
t. 
national union conceived without distinction of class and parties 
is an indispensable fact.or; 
"3. 
Wishing to prove that the communists , in so f'ar as 
they are advance guard militants of the Vietnamese people, are 
always r eady to make the greatest sacrif'ices for national 
liberation, are alHays disposed to put the interest of the ' 
country abov~ that of classes, and to give up the interests 
of the Party to serve thos e of the Vietnamese people; 
"4. 
In order to destroy all misunderstandings, domestic 
and foreign, Hhich can hinder the liberation of our country, 
the Central Executive Committee of the Indochina Communist 
Party in meeting assembled on November 11, 1945, has decided 
to voluntarily dissolve the Indochina Communist Party. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-42 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IIThose followers of communism desirous of continuing their 
theoretical studies will affiliate with the Indochina Association 
of Marxist Studies. 
CENTRAL COW~ITTEE INDOCHINA COMMUNIST PARTY 
November 11) 1945" 
47/ 
The dissolution of the ICP .las opposed by Tran Van Giau and others from 
Cochinchina) 1-rhere the ICP rather than the Viet Minh) as such) had con-
stituted the primary political organization among the people) but HO's 
views prevailed. 
Evidently Ho was also compelled by the opposition's constant demands 
for representation in the government to schedule national elections for 
January) 1946. 
Hmrever) fearful of Viet Minh control of the polls) and 
respectful of its popular strength) the VNQDD and the Dong Minh Hoi on 
23 December) 1945) negotiated with the Viet Minh an agreement to seat, 
irrespective of the vote) 50 VNQDD and 20 Dong Minh Hoi delegates among 
some 300-360 members of the National Assembly. 48/ 
The elections were 
held as scheduled) openly in Tonkin and Annam) and clandestinely in 
Cochinchina. 
The chief of the American O.S.S. group in Hanoi from 22 August to 
12 December) 1945) in a debriefing in the Department of State on 30 Janu-
ary 1946) described the political situation in North Vietnam as follo1-rs: 
ItGeneral Gallagher pointed out that little love was lost 
betveen the Chinese and the Frenchj that the presence of the 
American group in Hanoi restrained anti-French Chinese actionj 
and that he himself had influenced General Lu Han 
(C o~manding 
General of Chinese armed forces in Indochina) to bring Sainteny 
and Ho Chi Minh together and confront both 1-rith a strong direc-
tive that order must be maintained. 
The existence of a vacuum in 
the north with neither French nor Chinese troops present would 
be extremely dangerous) for the Annamese would react strongly 
against all French in the area) who lvould be helpless i n protecting 
themselves. 
To take over successfully) the French would need a 
sufficient force to cover the whole north. 
One or hlO modern 
French divisions could) in General Gallagher's opinion) defeat 
the Annamese. 
IIIn response to the question whether the French could do more 
than take key cities) he admitted that the A~Damese would take to 
the hills and continue guerrilla warfare. 
Even in Saigon) he 
pointed out) things are far from peaceful despite British and 
French claims to the contrary. 
Establishment of French control 
could be speeded up if they were able to make large-scale air 
drops throughout the north. 
The Annamese) hmvever) are >vell 
organized and) so far as small arms go) are quite well armed) 
although they have no navy) shore batteries and probably little 
artillery. 
B-43 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"The question was raised .lhether the French mission in Hanoi 
was in fact negotiating with Ho Chi Minh. 
General Gallagher 
replied that the Viet Minh Provisional Government was at first 
willing to negotiate; then in October) after de Gaulle's pro-
nouncements on colonial policy, the Annamese refused to negotiate 
with the French and reacted vigorously against all French nationals 
in Hanoi.. 
The Chinese may succeed in puttj.ng in a less anti-
French Annamese government so that negotiation might go forward. 
All French efforts to stimulate a palace revolution against Ho 
were of no avail. 
Ho himself will not deal vrith the French. 
The 
Viet Minh is strong and) regardless of possible superficial changes 
in the Provisional Government) Ho will be behind any continuing 
Annamese movement. 
General Gallagher said that Sainteny had told 
him he expected peaceful agreement betHeen the French and the 
Annamese vould be reached by negotiation. 
IIGeneral Gallagher vas asked how effective the Viet Minh admin-
istration Iwuld be .Tith neither French nor Chinese forces present. 
He replied that on the vhole he Has impressed by the remarkably 
effective Annamese administration. 
There was an able personnel; 
they .Tere all enthusiastic and young, but there were too few of 
them . 
Whatever their technical skill) they perhaps lack executive 
ability and experience since the technical services in Hanoi .,ere 
at first very well run but gradually deteriorated. 
Trained people 
for the government and at the municipal level are l acking . 
In 
General Gallagher 's opinion the Annamese are not yet ready for 
self~govermo.ent and in full-fledged competition l-lith other nations 
they would 'lost their shirts.' 
HovTever) the demand for inde-
pendence is widespread and even in the villages the peasants refer 
to the example of the Philippines . 
"Ho is willing to cooperate with Great Britain) USSR, or the 
United States and "l-TOuld perhaps even settle for French tutelage if 
that were subordinated to control by the other nations. 
French 
t 
control alone, however) viII be strongly resisted. 
The deep-seated 
hatred for the French has been fanned by exceedingly clever Viet 
Minh propaganda. 
"General Gallagher was asked "l-Thether the Annamese were realistic 
regarding their ability to stand up aga inst French military force. 
While they are too enthusiastic and too naive) he said) they prob-
ably know that they will be licked. 
They are strong on parades 
and r eiterate their i.rillingness 'to fight to the last man) I but 
they would be slaughtered and they have been told that and probably 
know it. The Annamese .Tould be no match for forces vrith modern 
arms even if they themselves have some, which they may have since 
the Chinese found no Japanese rolling artillery and numerous Japanese 
anti-aircraft guns seem to have completely disappeared. 
United States 
Army representatives never did learn the extent of arms controlled 
by the Viet Minh. 
Certainly the Chinese are not turning Japanese 
arms over to them. 
Before V-J Day the Japanese undoubtedly had 
B-44 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
-- - ----
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
armed and trained many Annamese. 
A Japanese general claimed 
they had taken over on March 9 simply because the French could 
no longer control the Annamese, but this statement General 
Gallagher characterized as a lie . 
He had heard that under the 
pretext of arming Annamese gendarmes for police duty in Hanoi, 
the Japanese had actually armed three distinct contingents) dis-
missing each group when armed and bringing in a ne", one to be 
armed and trained. 
}Urthermore, the Annamese had acquired Japanese 
arms from arsenals which had been opened. 
General Gallagher did not 
know whether or not Tai Li (Deputy Director, Bureau of Investigation 
and Statistics, Chinese National Commission of Military Affairs) was 
sending arms to the Viet Minh. 
"General Gallagher was asked whether the presence of French 
hostages in the north lvould restrain French forces when they enter 
the region. 
He pointed out that only a few French civilians had 
been removed by air. All the rest, besides some five thousand 
disarmed French troops, ",ere still to be removed. 
The Chinese can-
not take them out nor would Lu Han even permit their evacuation to 
the Do Son Peninsula. 
Their presence had been a constant restraining 
influence on Sainteny. 
Asked ",hether the Annamese would let these 
French be evacuated, General Gallagher replied that they would have 
to if the Chinese >{ere still there) but that these French nationals 
would be a real problem if the Chinese were moved out. 
The American 
Army group had to exert considerable pressure on the Chinese to get 
them to give any freedom at all to French civilians in Haiphong, 
Hu~ and other centers besides Hanoi. 
However, the Chinese and French 
alone had arranged for shipments of food from the south. 
The Ameri-
can group, incidentally) had to intervene to prevent the monopoly 
by the French of such food or of food distributed by the U.S. Army. 
The French nationals could be evacuated from Hongai and Tourane by 
the United States when the Japanese "Tere removed if the Chinese 
would concentrate them at those ports. 
However) General Gallagher 
noted, that would place us in a position of working against the 
Annamese. 
i 
"Originally) General Gallagher explained, the French expected 
the UnHed States to play the same role in the north that the British 
were playing in the south. 
When they found us neutral they became 
more and more antagonistic and did everything possible to persuade 
United States personnel to favor the French position. 
They had no 
appreciation of the actual help which the American group gave to 
the prisoners' of war and some of the civilian French in the form of 
food, ~edical aid) and so on. 
The Annamese, too, expected American 
help originally, haying been thoroughly indoctrinated \{ith the 
Atlant~c Charter and other ideological pronouncements. 
In our neutral 
role we were thus a disappointment to both sides •... 
j 
"At the present time the Hanoi radio is controlled by the Chinese 
so that there is communication betvreen Hanoi and Saigon. 
A British 
B-45 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
military and civilian liaison team was sent to Hanoi and a 
Chinese counterpart to Saigon. 
The British in Hanoi at first 
made little progress with the Chinese but General Gallagher 
understands they have since made more headway. 
"The Chinese 60th Army in the south of the Chinese zone and 
the 93rd Army around Hanoi, both totalling some 50 thousand men, 
have been told to concentrate for removal to Manchuria, but whether 
they have actually moved out or not General Gallagher does not know. 
By December, hovever, the Chinese 53rd Army had begun to come in 
from Yunnan and would probably provide replacements for the other 
two Armies . 
"General'Gallagher noted that magnetic mines have not been 
entirely cleared at least from the northern ports and that the 
threat provided by these mines has helped and would continue to 
help keep the French from undertaking large-scale landing opera-
tions in that area . 
He felt that regular rail communications 
between Saigon and Hanoi might not be opened for another year." * 
In early 1946, Ho Chi Minh attempted to bring Ngo Dinh Diem into 
his government, but Diem, whose brother, Ngo Dinh Khoi, had been killed 
by the Viet Minh, refused. 
In February, attacks on Ho from both the com-
munist left and the non-Viet Minh nationalists r eached such intensity 
that Ho reportedly proposed his own resignation, and the forming of a 
state under Bao Dai. 49/ 
The BaoDai substitution, Ho felt, would not 
'only mollify his internal foes, but improve the DRV r s pos ition "\Oli th the 
Americans and French: 
to the U.S. Ho had sent a series of unans"\oTered 
appeals for internationalizing Vietnam; and with the French, Ho had 
opened talks trending toward a French-protected) French-recognized) inde-
pendent DRV. 
(2) 
The Government of 2 March 1946 
The National Assembly rrelected in J anuary met on 2 March 
1946) and approved the ne"\Ol DRV government at its opening session. 
Its 
top echelon of 12 contained only 2 ICP members) but 3 VNQDD and 1 Dong 
Minh Hoi; Ho remained President, but his Vice President was the leader' of 
the Dong Minh Hoi, and the key portfolios of Interior and Defense "I{ent 
to neutrals. 
The new government faced at the outset a crlS1S in relations with 
France . 
Though General Leclerc's "pacification " operations in South Viet-
nam had fallen short of expectations ) French troops and shipping had arrived 
in Indochina in sufficient quantity for th~n to contemplate operations in 
North Vietnam. 
Simultaneously, the French undertook negotiations with 
the Chinese, seeking to have them relinquish their occupation of North 
Vietnam) and "\OTith the DRV) seeking to have it accept the reintroduction 
* Reproduc ed from Memorandum of Conversation by Mr. Richard L. Sharp) 
of the Division of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State) 
dated January 30) 1946; 
B-46 
TOP SECRE'I' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
of French forces . 
In the meantime , the British withdrew from Cochinchina; 
on 4 March 1946, the Allied , Southeast Asia Command deactivated Indochina 
as a territory within its purview. 
In February, the French deployed an 
amphibious task force prepared for operations in North Vietnam. 
On 
28 February, they obtained Chinese agreement (from Chunking, not the 
Chinese satraps in North Vietnam) to turn over the occupation to France 
by April. 
Ho Chi Minh, faced ,vith French military power and Chinese with-
dravlal, and denied succor from the United Nations or the U.S., had no re-
course save to negotiate vlith the French. 
The Accord signed by Ho with the French on 6 March, 19~6, taxed Ho's 
popularity to the utmost. 
The VNQ.DD had vehemently opposed compromise, and 
even negotiations with the French, but Ho was careful to bring opposition 
representatives into his talks with Sainteny, the French spokesman, and to 
see ot it that the March 6 Accord was signed not only by Ho and Sainteny, 
but also by Vu Kong Kanh, the leader of the VNQ~D. Still, feeling ran 
high against the French, and it took all of Ho's prestige to prevent re-
bellion against the Viet Minh. 
On 7 March, Ho and Vo Nguyen Giap defended 
the Accor,d before a crovld of 100,000 in Hanoi, in 'which Ho as sured his 
people that: 
"You know that I vTOuld rather die than sell our country." 2!}) 
On 8 March French troops landed in Haiphong, and re-entered Hanoi ten days 
later. 
Upon French return -- Ho's coalition cabinet and Vu Kong Kanh's signa-
ture on the March 6 Accord not'withstanding -- a number of VNQ.DD leaders 
wi thdreiv their support of Ho' s government in protest against what they 
termed a "pro-French" policy of the Viet Minh. 
The Emperor Bao Dai left 
the country on 18 March, the day the F-rench entered Hanoi. Ho, thereupon, 
moved to merge the Viet Minh into a larger, more embrasive Front organiza-
tion, which would consolidate the several parties of the DRV, and ther eby 
ease political stress. 
On 27 May 1946, the formation of the Po'pular National 
Front (Lien Hiep Q.uoc Dan VietNam) -- subsequently known as the Lien Viet --
was announced , to bring about "independence and democracy." 
Prominent leaders 
of all political parties were among the founders, and they jointly pledged 
"to safeguard our autonomy, so as to l ater attain complete independence ." W 
The Viet Minh, VNQ,DD, the Dong Minh Hoi, the Socialist Party and the Demo-
cratic Party were all roofed under the Lien Viet, but maintained separate 
organizations. 
(3) 
Chinese Withdrawal 
,Agreement among the several parties in the Lien Viet 
lived, hOl·rever , only so long as the Chinese remained in North Vietnam. 
Despi te Chungking's contract to vTi thdraw by April, 1946, the warlords 
lingered at their looting into June. 
On June 10, 1946, Chinese Nationalist 
troops evacuated Hanoi, and on June 15, the last detachments embarked at 
Haiphong . 
On June 19, the official Lien Viet organ Q.ui Q.uoc published 
a sharp rebuke of "reactionary saboteurs of the March agreement, " pointedly 
directed at the VNQ,DD . 
Reaffirming a policy of cooperation with France, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-47 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the Vietnamese government invited the French to join in a campaign 
against lIenemies of the peace • ." 
The French) recognizing in the Lien 
Viet their sole Vietnamese su~port ) willingly acceded. 
One of the more remarkable chapters in the tragic history of Viet-
namese nationalism then ensued. 
On the heels of the withdrawing Chinese, 
Vo Nguyen Giap's DRV troops struck into the regions governed by the 
Dong Minh HOi) VNQDD, and Phuc Quoc. 
In a series of skirmishes) they 
routed the partisan bands) and overturned the civil administrations of 
the opposition parties. 
The French not only provided equipment, but in 
some instances actually maneuvered their own forces with, and furnished 
artillery support for, the Vietnamese . 
Some strongholds held out for 
months ~- Lao Kay on the Yunnan border remained in VNQDD hands until 
November) 1946 -- but the issue lvaS decided before the end of July. 52/ 
On JQly 11 to 13, in a series of raids in Hanoi) DRV forces with 
French armor in support occupied the opposition party headquarters and 
printing plants) and arrested over 100 political fi.gures. 
With that, 
most of the opposition l eaders returned to exile in China whence they 
had come l ess than a year before. 
Among these were Nguyen Hai Than of 
the Dong Minh Hoi -- Hors Vice president -- and Vu Khong Kanh and Nguyen 
Tuong of the VNQDD -- the former one of the three signatories of the 
March 6 Accord, the latter Ho's Minister of foreign Affairs and one of 
the negotiators of the Accord. 
The U.S. Vice Consul in Hanoi submitted the follo¥ing report to the 
Department of State concerning the political situation at that juncture : 
IIPlease pass to General Marshall for information. 
IIThere are three important political parties in Viet Nam. 
IIThey are Viet Minh League, composed of former Indo-Chinese 
Comraunist Party (PCI dissolved itself November 30) 1945) and 
Democratic Party) son /Sic7 Vietnam Cach Menh Dong Minh HOi) 
generally referred to as Dong Minh Hoi or IMH; and Vietnam Quac 
Dan Dang. 
IIThere are in addition several splinter parties which seem to 
serve chiefly as vehicles for organized banditry. 
IIB~th Don'g Minh Hoi and Quoc Dan Dang seem have support of 
Chinese . 
Most active part of Viet Minh is factor composed of 
former , PCI members. 
I 
IIViet Minh strength seems to be spread throughout northern 
I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Indo-China. 
Dong Minh Hoi and Quoc Dan Dang control territory 
in Moncay, Langson, Vinh Yen area. 
"As yet no Catholic party has appeared nor do Catholics 
appear to be committed. to support of anyone party. 
Viet Minh 
League has been making tentative moves to capture Catholic 
support but is said to be too radical to obtain full coopera-
tion from church. 
In vievl of fact church claims million mem-
bers in Tonking and Annam (large percentage believed to be 
'rice Christians'), it seems probable that Catholics as group 
will [notf/ remain long absent from politics." * 
In July, the same. source reported that Viet Minh was steadily eliminating 
the Dong Minh Hoi and VNQDD as organized opposition. ** 
Ho Chi Minh was absent from Vietnam during the summer and early 
fall of 1946, engaged first by the abortive Fontainebleau negotiations 
and then by their aftermath, the modus vivendi he signed with France 
on 14 September 1946. 
During Hots absence, Vo Ngu~en Giap -- Acting 
Minister of the Interior and Minister of National Defense -- policed 
the Vietnamese political battlefield, arranging for the VNQDD and 
other "opposition" parties to survive -- suitably disarmed and manned 
with cooperative nationalists -- vlithin the Lien Viet. 
The Lien Viet 
proceeded to forge new "unity" vrithin the Front, and to tighten Front 
control oyer the DRV. 
On Ho t s return, the National Assembly vras called 
back into session, presented vrith a reorganized government and a new 
constitution . 
(4) The Government of 3 November 1946 
The National Assembly elected in January, 1946 
in 
dubiously honest elections -- convened in Hanoi in late October. 
Of 
the original membership, 291 delegates presented themselves. 
The com-
position at opening was as follows: 
t 
* Telegram, Hanoi 20 to State, 20 May 1946 
** Telegram, Hanoi 69 to State, 26 July 1946 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-49 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DRV 
Political Parties in the DRV National Assembly 
2J./ 
October 28, 1946 
Independents 
Democratic 
Socialist 
Marxist 
Lien Viet 
Dong Minh Hoi 
VNQ,DD 
90 
45 
24 
15 
80 
17 
20 
291 
The VNQ,DD and the Dong Minh Hoi, allocated 50 and 20 seats respec-
tively, were thus less than 50% represented, and the Marxists group, the 
smallest in the Assembly, was, according to all surviving evidence, the 
most active and influential. 
During the two weeks the Assembly Ivas in 
session, a number of opposition members were arrested and charged with 
criminal offenses. 
When the Assembly closed, 20 Dong Minh Hoi and VNQDD 
members remained, and of these , only 2 registered dissenting votes. 
The new constitution, ratified on 8 November 1946 by the National 
Assembly with a vote of 240 to 2, ordained in phrases reminiscent of 
J efferson and Rousseau a state of guaranteed civic freedoms, of delineat ed 
duties and rights of citizens, and of a people's parliament supreme in 
pmver. 
Thereafter, the Ass embly adjourned until late 1953, and never 
did get around to transforming itself into constitutionally prescribed 
form. d!iJ 
The 1946 Constitution declared Vietnam to be a democratic 
republic in which all pm'ler belonged to the people "without distinction 
of race, class, creed, "\-Tealth, or sex." Its territory, "composed of Bac-
Bo, or Northern Viet Nam (Tonkin), Trung-Bo or Central Viet Nam (Annam), 
and Nam-Bo or Southern Viet Nam (Cochinchina) is one and indivisible ... 
The capital of Viet Nam is Hanoi." 22.1 
However, the Constitution of 
1946 never became institutionalized; instead, the exigencies of the war 
.. lith the French eventuated in a government ,vhich was literally an adminis-
trative extension of a rigidly disciplined politico-military apparatus 
headed by Ho Chi Minh, and a cadre of his old comrades from the Indochina 
Communist Party. 2§/ 
. 
The go~ernment approved by the National Assembly on 3 November 1946, 
however, preserved some of the facade of coalition; although the key ca,bi-
net posi tiors "\-Tere' filled by communists, the government included indepen-
dents , democrats, socialists and even one nominal VNQ,DD. 
Figure 5 presents 
the several, Vietnamese governments in the period 1945-1949 . 
Ho Chi Minh 
throughout ~hat period preserved coalition, at least pro forma.; the DRV 
government in 1949 was still composed of a minority of ICP members and 
included one VNQ,DD and one Dong Minh Hoi. 
(The chart i gnores the Lien 
Viet, using
l the more familiar Viet Minh throughout; the Vietnamese 
Nationalist Party is the VNQ,DD.) 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-50 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
C-overnIi;ent 
State of 
Vietnam 
Peopl e ' s 
Liberation 
Coa;mittee 
Provisional 
Executive 
Committee of 
the Southern 
Vietflnm 
Republic 
Provision':.l 
Gov't of 
t he Democratic 
Republic of 
Vietnaru 
Government 
of Sou.th 
Vietu!>ll\ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
Date 
ElItbliGhed 
, 
10 }'3l'cb 1945 
RUE 
TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive 
V IE'lliAI!i'~32 OO"/ERI71·1i11lTS 1945 -
191~2 
C3binet 
90?ll}?oflition 
Not 
Available 
Title 
Prime ~J.nisterTran TrOl1$ Kim 
L- Bao tai, Emperor, abdicated on 26 August 1945 i n f avor of the Democratic 
Republic of Vietna~-1 
16 August 1945 Hanoi 
12 Viet Minh 
(6 rep) 
Not Ava i lable 
2 VN D!1mocratic 
Party 
L- Superceded by Prov Gov ' t DRV, 2 September 1945-1 
25 Augu£1t 1945 Seigon 
6 Viet I11nh 
Chairman 
Tron Van Giau 
(4 rcp) 
1 VN Damocrstic 
Parly 
2 Non-parly 
1 National 
Independence 
Parly 
L-Overthl'O'iln by French Coup d' etat 23 September 
19 !~5 
2 Sep 1945 
Hanoi 
9 Viet }Ainh 
(6 rcp) 
4 VN Democratic 
Parly 
1 Catholic 
2 Non-Party 
L- Superceded by 
. 
Gov't mv, 2 l.\arch 1946 J 
14 Feb 1946 
&.li gon 
4 French 
8 Vietv.fImese 
President 
Minister of 
Foreign Affairs 
Minister of 
Interior 
}/I.ini ster of 
Propaganda 
Minister of 
1!a ·~iontl. 1 
Defense 
JoI.iniDter of 
youth 
l-tlni 6'~er of 
Natione.l 
Economy 
Minister of 
Social Welfare 
I-liniater of 
JusM.ce 
Minister of 
Health 
!.unister of 
Public \{orks & 
Colll!lUlllcetions 
J.!inioter of 
labor 
Minister of 
Finance 
Minister of 
National 
Education 
Minister ;lith-
out Portfolio 
l.uniater lIith-
out Portfolio 
Consultative 
Council of 
Cochinchina 
Ho Chi Minh 
Ho chi !·linh 
Vo nguyen Giap 
Tran huy Lieu 
Chu van Tan 
fuong duc Ilion 
Nguyen ruanh Ha 
Nguyen v:"'.n To 
Vu trong Khallh 
Ph!.>.m ngoc Tha ch 
lao trong Kim 
I.e van Hien 
Fham Yen fung 
Vu dinh Roe 
Cu Huy Can 
Nguyen \'all Xuan 
Conservative 
Nationalist 
rcp 
Col!llllUD.iot-Viet Hinh 
Communist-Viet Minh 
COlllI!1Ul1i flt-Viet Hin.l1, 
Communist-Viet Minh 
Viet lUnh 
Democrat 
Catholic 
Non-parly 
Dcmocl's '~ 
t 
Viet m.nh 
Non-p30rty 
Coc.''launist-Viet ltirili 
Communist-Viet Minh 
Democrat 
Democrat 
Viet llinh 
B-51 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Government 
Democratic 
Republic of 
Vietnam 
I 
J 
',.' 
Republic of 
Cochinchioo 
Ihte 
Est8bliGhed 
2 March 1946 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VIErnAtGSE GO""F..."~l~ 19~5 - 191;.9 (COlV"I"D) 
Hanoi 
cabinet-
~siti.on 
Title 
Incumbent 
2 lCP 
Preo1dent 
Ho chi Minh 
Vic~ President Nguyen hai Than 
~1inister of 
Nguyen tuong Tam 
Foreign Affairs 
3 VN la tionalist I-linis',er of 
Huynh thuc !<hang 
Interior 
Minister of 
!'han Anh 
National ~fenoe 
Minister of 
Chu ba Phuong 
National 
Economy 
1 Dong ~111lh Hoi 
Minister of 
Vu dinh Hoo 
Justice 
2 Deznocrats 
lo'J.niater of 
Iang tha i 
~!ai 
Education 
Minister of 
Be =n illa.t 
I!gricuUure 
1 Socialists 
Hinioter of 
Truong dinh Tri 
Socia l 
~!elfare 
3 Independents 
Minister of 
Le van lUen 
Finance 
~nd.ster pf 
Tran dBng Khoa 
Public Works t.. 
COrmnunications 
Part;r 
Communist-Viet Minh 
Dong l·l1nh Hoi 
Vietnam Nationalist 
Party 
Independent 
Socialist 
Vietnam llationalist 
Party 
Democrat 
Viet Minh * 
Dong Hinh Hoi ** 
Vietnam Nationalist 
Party 
Communist-Vict Minh 
Democrat 
* The post of ttlnister of National Education was held 
only tempomrily by tang thai ~lai for Cao van Thinh 
( Indep~mdent ) • 
• ~. Be ~.n T..uat b ecame Vice Hinister of Agriculture 
andIluynh thien Lec ( Independent) aSSUllJed the Hinistry. 
The Vice ¥dnistries were divided as follows : 
Vice ¥J.niater 
Hoang ruinh Giam 
Socialist 
of Interior 
Vice Hinister 
Ta quang fuu 
of National 
Independent 
Dafense 
Vice Minister :,r!guyen van Huong 
Independent 
of Justice 
Vice minister 
Ihug phuc Thong 
Viet l-l1nh 
of Public Works 
& Co~~i eations 
Vice Minifj'~er of Trinh Van llinh 
Independent 
Finance 
Vice l-l1nister 
Do duc Duc 
Democrat 
of Natioll.!l.l 
Education 
L-Reorganir,ed under constitution 
adopted by National Assembly, 
llovember 1946 J 
Vice l·l1nister 
Be Xuan !J.la t 
of Agriculture 
Vice J.'.inister 
Do Tiep 
of Socia l 
Dons JlJ.nh Hoi 
Dong Minh Hoi 
1 June 1946 
Saigon' 
All French 
AppOintees 
B- 52 
Welfare 
Vi ce J.'.inister 
Nghiem ko To 
Vietnam Nationali st 
Party 
of Foreign 
Affairs 
In addition, the follOWing ~ere elected: (1) a Consultative 
High Council headed by Nguyen vinh 'Ihuy(ex-emperor &Ii 
fui ) ; (2) A supreme council of National Defense with 
Vo ngt\yen Giap ( CO~ist ) 8S president and Vu khong 
Khsnh (Nationalist Party) 8S vice-president; (3) the 
President of the National Assembly, Ngo tu Ha ( Catholic ) ; 
(If) the permanent COlJ'.mittee of the Assembly headed by 
Bui bang Doan ( Independent ) 
President 
Nguyen van Thinh 
Democratic 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Government 
Democratic 
Republic of 
Vietnam 
". 
3 Nov 1946 
" .' 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Henoi 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Cabinet 
Co~)?Osit :!.on 
5 ICP 
5 Independent s 
2 D300crat 
1 Socialist 
1 Nationalist 
2 Vacant 
B- 53 
Title 
IncUI!ibent 
ra~ 
President 
Ho chi Minh 
Communist-Viet Minh 
Vice-PrcfJident Vacant>'(· 
Minister of 
Ho chi ~1iIL.'l 
ColDlJ!Ulllst-Viet Minh 
Foreign Affairs 
~lini ster of 
Huynh tllUc Khang 
Independent 
Interior 
MiniS'ter of 
Vo ngll\fen Giap 
Communist-Viet Minh 
Natiop.al 
DefenGe 
Minister of 
Vacant* 
National 
EcOL1Omy 
Mini uter of 
Vu dinh Hoe 
D3mocl'at 
J ustice 
Minister of 
10 van Hion 
Communist-Viet Minh 
Finance 
Minister of 
Nguyen ,ran Huyon 
SoCialist 
National 
Education 
Minister of 
Agriculture 
Ngo tan Hoon 
Independent 
Minister of 
Communications 
8. Public Works 
Tron dang Khoa 
Minister of 
Nguyen van Tao 
labor 
MiniBter of 
Hoong tich Tri 
Health 
Mini star of 
Chu ba Phuong 
Social Welfare 
~lini8ter without Nguyen Van To 
Portfolio 
Minister without Be Acmn Lus t 
Portfolio 
Supreme 
CO\ll1cillor 
Vice Nlnister 
of Foreign 
Affa irs 
Vice l<linister 
of Interior 
Vice HiniBter 
of National 
Defense 
Vice Minister 
of National 
Eccm;:;;rry 
Vice ~liniB"'~er 
of Agriculture 
Vice lIJ.uister 
of Justi ce 
Vice j·linifl'1#er 
of Finance 
Vice llinister 
of Nation!lol 
Education 
Nguyen vinh Tnuy 
( Bao rai ) 
Hoang minh Giam 
Hoang huu !iam 
~'a 'luang Buu 
Pham van Dong 
Cu huy Can 
Tran cong Tuong 
Trinh van Binh 
Nguyen khanh Toan 
Vice Minister 
Dang phue Thong 
of COlDlJ!Ulli cation 
& Public Works 
Vice Minister 
Vacant*** 
of Health 
Vice l·linister 
Vacant 
of labor 
Vi ce llinister 
Vacant 
of Socia l 
Welfe.re 
D3mocrat 
Communi st -Viet Minh 
Independent 
Vietnam Nationalist 
Party 
Independent 
Independent 
Socialist 
Communist -Viet Minh 
Independent 
COmrilUllist-Vi e't Minh 
D3mocrat 
t 
Democrat 
Independent 
Corr~ist-Viet Minh 
Socialist 
* Pham ngoc Thach (Viet lIJ.nh) apparent ly acted as 
a ssistant to Ho chi Minh in the cabinet . 
The Vice-
president .. JaS not filled until July 1949 , when Pham 
van Dong (Communist-Viet Minh) ~as given the post . 
H 
Phan Anh (Socialist ) wee appointed ~l1nister of 
National Economy on J anuary 26, 1947. 
*"H Nguyen kinh Chi ( Independent ) we B appOint ed t o 
t he Vice l-iinlet.ry of Hea lth . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Damocratic 
RE"pl.1.bl1c ot 
Vietll14"il 
(Cont'd) 
Provi a10nal 
Governmant 
of South 
Vietnam 
Adl!l1nistrat1ve 
COilllllittee ot 
Tonkin 
Adl!l1uiBt:t'1ltive 
Co=ittee of 
At=m 
])ate 
Eatllblif.hecl 
13 Oct 1947 
J.!ny 1947 
113.Y 1947 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Saigon 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
cabinet 
CO!:lJ.X?si t1.o,a 
InCUlll bent 
Vico ~liniuter 
Ton t hat Tung 
of Health 
Vice Minister 
Vacant 
of labor 
Vice J.lin1Gter 
Vacant 
of Social 
Welfare 
Vice tUm. ster 
Ngo tu BEl 
of War Veterans 
and Invalids 
Independent 
Independent(Cstholic) 
French-sponeorcd regim~ 
Nguyen Van Xuan,President 
Hanoi 
French-sponsored regime 
Hue 
French-sponsored regime 
________________________________ ~~=-~_=~~~~ 
____ 
a ____ ==-~~ ____________ __ 
Provioional 
6 June 
Hanoi 
Vietn!iID 
1948 
Central 
Nguyen Van Xuan, President 
Government 
GoverDlll~n'l; 
1 July 
Saigon 
of 
1949 
V1et= 
Emperor Bao Dai , Head of State 
B-54 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Democrntic 
Republic of 
Viet= 
Dl.tc 
Elltabl10hed 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VJ:E'rW.:Mi3 OOVF.?1Jt:m'l' 1945 
l S99 (cma" D) 
ClmbiIl .. t 
CC":WODi Hon 
5 rcp 
5 Indcpend01lt 
2 D:loocrot 
3 Socialist 
1. r.::.tion::,l1st 
1 Dong }.!j,n Hoi 
~ 
Incumbont 
President 
Ho chi Minh 
Vice Preaident 
l'hs!ll van Dong 
J.!1niater of 
Hcm~ minh Giam 
Foreign Mfairo 
Minill'ter of 
P'aan ke Teai 
In'iler10r 
Minister of 
Vo nguyen G1ap 
Ks.tionnl 
Defence 
Minister of 
Phnn Anh 
N...tional 
EcollO'JJ;Y 
J.tiniater of 
Vu dinh Hoe 
Jut.ltice 
Mini oter of 
1..0 VQIl Bien 
Fin'lllce 
ltini Elter of 
Nguyen van Ruyen 
Ns.tional 
Education 
Minister of 
Ilga tan Nhon 
AgriclLlture 
Minister of 
Tran dzlng Khoa 
Colt!llUllications 
«. Public \/orks 
Minister of 
Nguyen van Tao 
LnbOl" 
Mini Bter of 
Hoang tich Tri 
Health 
.tinister of 
Chu b!l. Phuong 
Socia l Welfare 
Minioter of 
Vu diD.!} Tung 
~lar Veterans 
& Invalids 
Minister with-
Be xuan Luat 
out Portfolio 
Mini ster wi'ch-
rang van Huong 
out Portfolio 
Psrty 
Cocw,unillt-Viet ~tinh 
COll3lUIl1st-Viet ~tinh 
Socialist 
Ind0pcndent 
Co=nist-Viet Minh 
Socialist 
DeIWcrat 
Co~ist-Viet Minh 
Socialil!t 
Independent 
Democrat 
COllU'!lunist-Viet Minh 
Independent 
Viet nam F~tionaliBt 
Party 
. 
Independent (Catholic) 
Dong Minh Hoi 
Independent (Buddhist ) 
Vice l-tlnisters >lere divided as follows: 
Vice Minister 
Va cant 
of Foreign 
Affairs 
Vice ~!ini8ter 
Tran duy Hung 
Independent 
of Interior 
t 
Vice Itl.nister 
'l'a quang Buu 
Independent . 
of Nations:). 
Defense 
Vice l41nister 
Cn huy Can 
Democrat 
of l:atiom,l 
Economy 
Vice IUni ster 
Rghiem XlI5n Yem 
Independent 
of Agriculture 
Vice ~tin:l.eter 
Tran cong Tuong 
Democrat 
of Justice 
Vice Minister 
Trinh van Binh 
Independent 
of Fill9.nce 
Vice Minister 
N3UYen khanh Toan 
Communist-Viet Minh 
of National 
Education 
Vice M1nicter 
Dang phuo Thong 
Socialist 
of C~lcation 
. 
& Public ~lorko 
B-55 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I.B .3, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
3. 
Nationalism During the Franco-Viet Minh War 
Both the DRV constitution and the government of' November, 1946, 
were soon submerged as the Viet Minh geared f'or war with France . 
A series 
of' armed incidents in November , f'ollowed by large scale f'ighting in Hanoi 
in late December, destroyed what was lef't of' the Franco-Viet modus vivendi. 
The DRV government took to the hills to assume a status of' shadow state. 
The viet Minh -- properly, the Lien Viet -- transf'ormed itself' into a semi-
covert resistance organization, and committed itself' to the military de-
f'eat of' the French. 
During the opening year of' the war, 1947, the DRV 
took steps to enhance its coalition nature, and to broaden the appeal 
of' the Viet Minh. 
Communists, including Vo Nguyen Giap, were removed 
f'rom the cabinet, and prominent Catholics and independents added. 
There-
after, the government shifted steadily l eftward . 
In the SUlTh."Uer of' 1948, 
Giap was reappointed Minister of' National Def'ense, and a year later, Pharo 
Van Dong, top communist, became Vice President. 
Moreover, while at f'irst 
resistance against the French was of'f'ered by disparate political groups, 
eventually the Viet Minh, by superior organization and leadership, recap-
tured their monopoly over revolutionary nationalism. 
Following is a survey of' the principal Vietnamese political movements 
in the period 1947-1950. 
~lO main groupings existed : 
the communist-centered 
Viet Minh and its auxiliaries in resistance to the French, and those national'-
ists f'inding common cause in the restoration of' Bao Dai. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-56 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. 
( 
I .. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Vi etnamese Political Movements, 1947-1950 
PARTY or FACTION 
The Resistance Groups 
Viet Minh (or Lien Viet ) 
(Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong 
Minh Hoi) 
Communist Party 
(Viet Nam Cong San Dang) 
Vietnam Democratic Party 
(Viet Nam Dan Chu Dang) 
I 
Vietnam Socialist Party 
(Viet Nam Xa Ho:!:. Dang) 
I 
Vietnam Nl tionalist 
(VNQ,DD) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Party 
Vietnam Revolutionary League 
(Dong Mi~ Hoi ) 
DESCRIPTION 
Only political apparatus Ylhich extended 
throughout Vietnam and Vietnamese society. 
Drew on World War II reputation, but cre-
ated new doctrine for political and mili -
tary action. 
Leadership effective , and 
capitalized well on Ho's prestige as pre-
eminent nationalist. 
Formally merged with 
the Lien Viet in March, 1949. 
Ostensibly dissolved, but evidently func-
tioning as the core of the Viet Minh. 
CIA 
estimates membership grew over the years 
as follows : 
1931: 
1500 
1946 : 
50,000 
Party adhered strictly to "popul ar front" 
line, r emaini ng covert , and working through 
the Viet Minh . 
A small, middle class, largely Tonkinese 
group within the Viet Minh, loyal to Ho 
Chi Minh, and solid supporters of the DRV 
government. 
A Hanoi-echo of European Social-Democratic 
parties, narrowly based and small in num-
bers ; created i n 1946 within the Viet Minh, 
and a consistent supporter of the DRV 
government . 
A small, uninfluential faction of the VNQDD , 
operating within the Viet Minh . 
A second splinter group of little political 
power. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-57 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
PARTY or FACTION 
Resistance Groups (Continued) 
Trotskyist Movement 
The Bao Dai Restoration Movements 
National Union Front 
(Mat Tran Thong Nhut Q,uoc 
Gia Lien Hiep) 
Vietnam Revolutionary League 
(Dong Minh Hoi) 
Vietnam Nationalist Party 
(VNQ.DD ) 
DESCRIPTION 
A Saigon centered, left-wing communist 
faction opposed to the French and to the 
Viet Minh alike. 
Principal significance 
,.,as its continued impairment of communist 
effectiveness in Cochinchina. 
Formed in Nanking in February, 1947, by 
VNQ.DD and Dong Minh Hoi leaders; gained 
support of Tran Trong Kim (Bao Dai' s 
premier in the March-August 1945 government), 
Nguyen Hai Than (Ho's onetime Dong Minh Hoi 
Vice President), and Nguyen Tuong Tam 
(VNQ.DD, sometime Foreign Minister of the. 
DRV). 
Claimed to unite the VNQ.DD, the Dong 
Minh HOi, the Cao Dai, and the Buddhists 
behind Bao Dai, but splintered with with-
draw·al of sect supporters , and under impact 
of French political maneuvers. 
Re-established in China in 1946, but never 
again influential in Vietnam; probably 
numbered 5,000 or less. When war broke 
out, sought reconciliation with Viet Minh, 
but was rebuffed. 
Swung to Bao Dai, al-
though supporting a hard line with thetFrench. 
Enjoyed prestige of tradition dating to 
1930's, but fortunes waned with Chiang 
Kai-shek's, with whom it had associated 
itself closely. 
Probably numbered 5,000 
or less, and influence within Vietnam 
largely confined to Hanoi, and to northern 
Tonkin, in Viet Minh heartland. 
Support for 
Bao Dai highly tentative and heavily condi-
tioned. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-58 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
PARTY or FACTION 
DESCRIPrION 
The Bao Dai Restoration Movements (Continued) 
Vietnam Democratic Socialist 
Party 
(Viet Nam Dan Chu Xa Hoi Dang) 
A Cochinchinese faction which splintered 
from the Viet Minh over quarrels with Viet 
Minh leaders. 
Included Cao Dai, Hoa Hao, 
and Binh Xuyen leaders, and participated 
in the National Union Front. 
Party frac-
tured in November, 1947, over dispute with 
Hoa Hao, and thereafter became defunct. 
Popular Movement 
(Doan The Dan Chung) 
Vietnam Nationalist Youth 
Alliance 
(Viet Nam Quoc Gia Thanh 
Nien Doan; 
Cao Dai League 
(Doan The Cao Dai) 
Hoa Hao 
(Phat Giao Hoa Hao) 
A Hanoi-centered anti-DRV Tonkinese move-
ment which acquired no widespread follow-
ing, and by 1949 seemed to have fallen 
apart. 
Another small Tonkinese movement '"hich was 
of little significance. 
Headed by Pham Cong Tac, the Cao Dai Pope 
(in 1946 returned by the French from exile 
in Madagascar). 
The League claimed 
1,000,000 to 2,000,000 adherents in cochin-
china and maintained (with some French aid) 
armed forces. 
Clashes beti"een the Cao Dai 
and Niet Minh troops ,,,ere frequent within 
the regions governed by the Cao Dai. 
The 
Cao Dai we:e divided on the issue of t:en?h 
support, Slnce xenophobia was common ~lthln 
the sect. 
In J anuary, 1948, the Cao Dai 
signed a peace with the Hoa Hao, and pledged 
support for Bao Dai. 
Pham Cong Tac' openly 
aligned himself with the Bao Dai government 
in July, 1949. 
Nonetheless, the sect re-
mained religiously, rather than politically 
oriented, and harbored a wide range of poli-
tical opinion. 
The principal commitment 
remained Cao Daism. 
Another Cochinchinese armed sect with a 
following of 200,000 to 1,000,000. 
During 
World War II the sect, with Japanese support, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-59 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
PARTY or FACTION 
DESCRIPTION 
The Bao Dai Restoration Movements (Continued) 
Hoa Hao (Continued ) 
(Phat Giao Hoa Hao ) 
----- ----- --- ---
Buddhist Group 
(Tinh Do Cu Si ) 
Vietnam Catholic League 
(Viet Nam Lien Doan 
--~­
Cong Giao) 
Binh Xuyen 
(Lien Khu Binh Xuyen ) 
I 
I 
Vietnam National Rally 
preached an anti-foreigner creed, and i n 
1945 j oined the anti-French, anti-British 
resistance. 
In 1947, Huynh Phu So, the 
sect's l eader , was executed by the Viet 
Minh, which led to the defection of the 
Hoa Hao from the resistance , and the sect's 
support of Bao Dai 's r estoration. 
Rela-
tions with the French, and with rival 
Vietnamese factions, remained strained . 
A movement centered chiefly on the over-
sea~ Chinese community, and advocated 
passive r esistance to the Viet Minh . 
Organized by and around the Catholic 
clergy, the League exercised varying de-
grees of influence over some 2,000,000 
Catholics , chiefly in Annam. 
The League 
supported the DRV in 1945 and 1946, and 
approved struggle for Vietnam's independence . 
Ngo Dinh Diem l ed the League i nto the 
National Union Front , but the League split 
with the Front over the desire of the 
majority to back the resistance , and the 
repugna,nce of the r emainder, including 
Diem, at Bao Dai's inability to break 
France 's control over Vietnam. 
A Saigon-sited gangster apparatus which 
originally fought as allies of the Viet 
Minh, but -- like the Hoa Hao -- were 
. disaffected by the Viet Minh 's shooting 
of several of their l eaders . 
Provided 
tepid support f or Bao Dai, and remained 
wary of the French. 
(Viet Nam Quoc Gia Lien Hiep) 
--1---
An outgrowth of the National Union Front 
f ormed i n December, 1947, i n Hanoi, the 
Rally attempted to merge the various pro-
Bao Dai parties in Cochinchina, Annam, and 
Tonkin . 
Such success as it enj oyed was a . 
matter of f orm r ather than substance , and 
its influence was quite limited . 
B-60 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
PARTY or FACTION 
DESCRIPrION 
The Bao Dai Restoration Movements (Continued) 
Vietnam Restoration League 
(Viet Nam Phuc Quoc Dong 
Minh HOi)-- ----
French Sponsored Movements 
B-6l 
Revived in 1947, the descendant of 
Japanese-oriented nationalist groups, 
the Phuc Quoc, under Prince Cuong De, 
at first attempted to offer an alterna-
tive to both the Viet Minh and Bao Dai. 
In June, 1947, and May, 1948, Prince 
Cuong De vainly solicited aid from the 
President of the United States against 
the French, and urged reconciliation 
between Ho Chi Minh and Bao Dai. 
The 
party remained Chiefly in exile, and 
was unable to exert any appreciable 
influence over events in Vietnam. 
With French encouragement, a number of 
Vietnamese parties. were formed to give 
body to the several governments established 
by the French. 
These included the Indo-
chinese Democratic Party, the Cochin-
chinese Democratic Party, the Popular 
Front of Indochina, and the Popular 
Movement of Cochinchina. 
In general, 
these parties supported the French poli-
cies of maintaining Cochinchina separate 
from Annam and. Tonkin, and of strong 
ties with France. 
Eventually, such 
minimal popular support as they cOmIDfnded 
was thrown behind the IIBao Dai solution. II 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The foregoing demonstrates the poverty of Vietnamese nationalist 
movements in the period 1946-1950; only the Viet Minh can be said to have 
been a Itnationalll movement at the outset of the war with France, and it 
built its popularity throughout the years of struggle . 
The Viet Minh 
stressed the primacy of political action among the people and the care-
ful preparation of bases as preconditions for military action. 
Their care-
ful attention to the former included extraordinary efforts to inculcate 
i n their troops attitudes and habits vThich would win the respect, and 
eventuall y the cooperation of the populace . 
The following extracts f r om 
Viet Minh doctrine are dated 1948: 
"TWELVE RECOMMENDATIONS 
"The nation ha,s its root in the people . 
"In t he Resistance war and national reconstruction, t he main 
f orce lies in the people. 
Therefore, all the people in the army, 
administration, and mass organizations who are in contact or live 
wit h the people , must remember and carry out the following recom-
mendations: 
"Six forbiddances : 
1 - Not to do what is likely to damage the l and and crops or 
spoil the houses and belongings of the people . 
2 - Not to insist on buhing or borrowing what the people are 
not wi lling to sel l or lend . 
3 - Not to bri ng living hens into mountainous people ' s houses . 
4 
Never to break our word . 
5 - Not to give offense to people ' s faith and customs (such 
as to l ie down before the altar , to raise feet over the hearth, 
. t o play music i n the house , etc .) 
6 - Not t o do or speak what i s l ikely to make peopl e believe 
that we hold them i n contempt . 
ItSix permissibles : 
1 - To help t he peopl e i n thei r daily wor k (harvesti ng, f etching 
fir ewood , carrying water , sevring , etc .) 
2 - Whenever possible to buy commodities for those who l ive 
far f r om markets (knife , salt , needle , thread , pen, paper , etc .) 
3 - I n spare time , t o tell amus i ng , s i mple , and short stories 
useful to the Resistance , but not to betray secrets . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-62 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
4 - To teach the population the national script and elementary 
hygiene . 
5 - To study the customs of each region so as to be acquainted 
with them in order to create an atmosphere of sympathy first , then 
gradually to explain to the people to abate their superstitions . 
6 - To sho'f to the people that you are correct, diligent, and 
disciplined ." 
"STIMULATING POEM 
The above-mentioned twel ve r ecommendations 
Are feasible to all. 
He who loves his country, 
Will never forget them. 
When the people have a habit, 
All are like one man, 
With good army men and good people, 
Everything will be crmmed with success. 
Only when the root is firm, can the tree live long , 
And victory is built with the people as foundations . 
. April 5, 1948" 
2J} 
Appraisal s of Vietnamese nationalist parties available to the U.S. 
Department of State in 1949, on the eve of U.S. involvement in the Indochina 
war, were , on the whole, perceptive . 
A paper submitted in February, 1949, 
by George M. Abbott, one of the few American diplomats who had talked with 
Ho face to face, summarized issues in the following terms : 
"C. 
International Relations . 
1. 
United States - Post war r elations between the United 
States , and Indochina got off to a bad start with President Roosevelt 's 
views on international trusteeship for strategic areas i n the hands 
of powers unable to defend them, followed by the overenthusiastic 
activities of certain ass agents in the period j ust before and after 
the Japanese surrender . 
The belief that the policy of the United 
States is to thrO'l'l the French out of Indochina still persists in 
many c'ircles both in Indochina and in France. 
We are al so blamed 
for pe~mittirig the Chinese and English to occupy the northern 
and southern halves of the country to disarm Japanese troops. 
Our 
persistent refusal to supply equipment and arms for French military 
operations i n Indochina is a sore subj ect vri th most French army 
offic e~s . 
Another source of irritation has been the almost uni-
versa1 tendency of American correspondents visiting I ndochina to 
write articles extremely critical of the French ... 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-63 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
If In recent weeks the French have actively supported proposals 
for four power cooperation in Southeast Asia to prevent the spread 
of communism, and there has been much talk about the strategic 
importance of Indochina as a bastion against the southward spread 
of Chinese Communists. 
liAs far as the Annamites are concerned, they were encouraged 
to believe that after the defeat of Japan we would assist them 
in obtaining independence. 
As it became apparent that our sym-
pathies were tempered by strategic considerations in Europe, the 
popularity of the United States has diminished. 
Nevertheless, 
the prestige of the United States is still high, and even Ho Chi 
Minh has been careful to prevent any public anti-American propa-
ganda ... 
. If No one knows how many communists there are in Indochina, 
but the number of real party members is certainly small. 
The highest 
estimate is 20% of the troops fighting with Ho Chi Minh and this 
includes sympathizers. 
Ho\vever, the number is undoubtedly growing, 
and at the same time non-communist military units are being steadily 
infiltrated with secret agents. 
Units under communist command are 
generally better armed. 
Thus the problem for the leader contemplat-
ing changing sides is not an easy one . 
l1Another point on which definite information is lacking is 
the channel of communications vli th Moscow and the center of re-
gional control ... Certainly satisfactory communications exist 
since Moscow publications of fairly recent date are frequently 
seized by the French ... 
If One peculiar thing about Vietnam Communism is that there 
has been very little anti-American propaganda. It is obvious 
that this is not due to i gnorance of the current party line . It 
t 
apparently represents a hope on the part of Ho Chi Minh that he 
may still obtain American support for or at l east acceptance of 
a Viet MiIlJl government under his l eadership . 
Evidence that this 
hope is diminishing is furnished in a 
regional party directive 
dated in November 1948 which stated that active anti-American 
propaganda should be conducted in party circles and by word of 
mouth among the people but should not yet appear on the radio, 
in the press,· or in public speeches ... 
"Opposed to the French forces are about 75,000 Vietnamese 
troops of various political complexions, largely under communist 
dominated leader ship . 
There is considerable French-furnished 
evidence of communist political commissars and indoctrination 
extending down to company strength l evels . It is certain that 
the disciplined comraunist element has been the l argest factor 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-64 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
in maintaining the vigor and cohesiveness of the resistance. 
In this, they have been greatly helped by French indecision and 
bad faith, and the terrorism of French troops. 
"In spite of arms captures and occasional defections, there 
is no sign of large scale weakening of Vietnamese resistance 
abilities or morale. 
The large areas under Vietnamese control 
lack luxuries and medicines, but are ,.,.holly self-sufficient 
in the basic necessities and tolerably well administered, accord-
ing to "That few reports are available. 
They continue to form 
a source of supplies and of fresh troops that are only limited 
in numbers by the arms available . 
"Although there are rumors of a Chinese Communist treaty 
with Ho Chi Minh, and of a Chinese Communist general and his 
staff in Northern Tonkin, there is little evidence , as yet, that 
the Chinese are of any considerable help in the resistance. 
French sources feel that there is little danger of a Chinese 
Communist 5th column in Cochinchina, or of an invitation on the 
part of Ho Chi Minh to the troops of the age-old national enemy 
to enter Indochina in force, in spite of the communist link. 
All French military sources consulted, however, feel that a large 
scale Chinese Communist invasion would make most , if not all, of 
Tonkin, militarily untenable. 
"For many months past, observers feel that the resistance 
has not put forth its maximum effort , perhaps because the leaders 
are waiting for the outcome of political negotiations going on 
between the High Commissariat, the French Government and the 
Xuan-Bao Dai elements . If these should break down, the resistance 
will be greatly strengthened by the adhesion of many now neutral 
or pro-French elements . If the negotiations are successful, the 
r esistance army is sure to be a dominant factor in any form of 
Vietnamese self-government ... 
11 2§} 
An extensive State Department intelligence report on I1Political Alignments 
of Vietnamese Nationalists
l1 22./ 
of October, 1949, highlighted the impor-
tance of the Viet Minh : 
liThe Viet Minh. 
The Vietnam Independence League (Viet Nam 
Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi), or Viet Minh, is the most influentie,l 
'political organization within the Vietne,m Government [Drrj]. 
It 
is the only political group whose organization extends dovm to 
the smallest villages. Its members include both individuals and 
parties, i.e., the Vietnam Socialist Party, the Vietnam Democratic 
Party, etc. 
As a League, it groups together a wide coalition of 
political personalities from moderate nationalists to doctrinaire 
communists. It most closely resembles the Chinese Kuomintang 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-65 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
during the period 1924-26, when the communists and Chang Kai-shek 
collaborated in China's nationalist movement. 
"The Viet Minh Executive Committee, or Tongbo , is the r eal 
repository of pO"l'Ter in Vietnam terri tory. 
The influential govern-
ment paper, National Salvation (Cuu Quoc ), is the organ of the 
Tongbo and reflects the line of the govermnent. 
A majority of 
the Tongbo members are believed to be former members of the 
dissolved Indochinese Communist Party. 
Within the mass national-
i st movement, the communists are undoubtedly the most cohesive 
political factor. 
President Ho Chi Minh is a communist but 
has great prestige as a nationalist leader among the mass of 
Vietnamese . 
He is the outstanding political personality in 
Indochina. 
He plays down his past communist connections , empha-
sizes the nationalistic aspects of his program, and is popularly 
considered a man above parties . 
. "The Viet Minh exercises its control over the mass national-
ist movement through a variety of ' national welfare' organizations 
of women, youth, peasants, soldiers, etc ., which in their totality 
embrace most of the population of Vietnam. 
Hoang Quoc Viet, the 
General Secretary of the Viet Minh, claims that the organization 
has a total membership of nine million .. • " 
The collapse of the Chinese nationalists in 19~9 r everberated .. rithin 
the Vietnamese nationalist movements. 
The Kuomintang-oriented parties --
principally the VNQDD -- were severely discredited , and the exile movements 
in China dispersed. 
The DRV began to shift into the communist ·bloc in search 
of material support , and there was a concomitant further leftvrardmovement 
within the Viet Minh. 
By 1951, the Communist Party was "legalized." 
The 
Lao Dong Party (Dang Lao Dong Viet Nam, or Vietnamese Workers ' Party) there-
after became the dominant political po .. rer within the DRV. 
The Lao Dong 
Party was expressly Marxist-Leninist, and proudly claimed an unbroken linfage 
to the Indochinese Communist Party founded by Ho Chi Minh, including leader-
ship of all the major nationalist "front" movements through 1951. 
Vo Nguyen 
Giap explained in 1961 that : 
"The Vietnamese people's war of liberation was victorious 
because we had a wide and firm National United Front ... organized 
and l ed by the Party of the working class: 
the Indochinese 
Communist Pa~ty, now the Viet Nam Workers ' fJ!:J.O Doni! Party . 
In the light of the principles of Marxism-Leninism ... the Party 
found a correct solution to the prOblems ... " §!1/ 
The Lao Dong Party official history has credited communist machination 
f or the key developments in Vietnamese history through 1951: 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-66 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. 
( 
c. 
() 
0< 
Z -", 
-f !:!lx 
:;:0 '>" .... 
0>'" 
"'--Z 
.. Z .... 
.-:::J: 
~ 
-0 
r 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TpP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
liThe policy of founding the Indochinese democratic front 
between 1936 and 1939, the Viet Minh front between 1941 and 
1951, and the Lien Viet front 0946-195Y; the decision of 
signing the 6 March 1946 ... preliminary accord LHo's accommo-
dation with Franc~... 
all these are typical examples of 
the clever application of the ... instruction of Lenin. 1I §]J 
In 1951, Ho Chi Minh himself set forth a Leninist account of the ori-
gins of the Viet Minh and its role in the forming of the DRV and the war 
against France. 
In February, 1951, addressing the Congress of the Viet-
namese Communist Party (Lao Dong), Ho explained his political maneuvers 
over the previous decades. 
Reviewing the history of the Russian and Chinese 
revolutions, he pointed out that Vietnam, too, had felt the stirrings of 
change , and the Vietnamese working class" ... began to struggle and needed 
a vanguard team, a general staff to lead it. 
On January 6, 1930, our Party 
came into being ... " 
He described how the Party had brought about the fornia-
tion of the Viet Minh, and the foundation of the DRV. 
Then in 1945 the 
French colonialists reappeared in South Vietnam and Chinese-sponsored re-
actionary government seemed in prospect in North Vietnam: 
IIIn the face of that grave and pressing situation, our 
Party did everything possible to keep itself in existence, 
to work and develop to give discreet and more effective 
leadership in order to have the time gradually to consoli-
date the forces of the People's power and to strengthen 
the National United Front. 
IIAt that time, the Party could not hesitate: Hesitation 
meant failure. 
The Party had to make quick decisions and 
to take measures -- painful ones -- to save the situation. 
The greatest worry was about the Party's proclamation of 
dissolution. 
But in r eality it went underground. 
And 
though underground, the Party continued to lead the admin-
istration and the people ..• 
j 
"Mention should be made of the [agreements with the French 
in 19427 because they were cons idered as ultrarightist and 
caused much grumbling. 
But in the opinion of our comrades 
and compatriots in the South, they were correct. 
Indeed 
they were, because our comrades and compatriots cleverly 
availed themselves of the opportunity to build up and de-
velop their forces . 
I 
. 
"Lenin said that even if a compromise with bandits was 
advantageous to the revolution, he would do it ... " §3/ 
. I 
Ho then went on to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the resistance 
against thel French, to describe the world situation in terms of a monolithic 
bloc of "democratic" nations against vrhich was arrayed the United States 
.and other reactionary powers, and to depict, as part of that larger clash, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-e3 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Vietnam's war in common with Laotians and Cambodians against the French and 
the United States. 
He called for "a legal party appropriate to the situation 
in the world and at home in· order to lead our people's struggle to victory. 
This party is the Vietnam Worker 's Party LLao Doni!. 
As regards its com-
position •.. it will admit the most enthusiastic and most enlightened workers, 
peasants, and intellectuals. As regards theory, it adheres to Marxism-
Leninism. 
As regards discipline, it has an iron discipline ..• " 
Thus ended the Viet Minh as a non-communist nationalist coalition. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-69 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I.B. 
NoteS 
r. B. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
FOOTNOTES 
1. Joseph Buttinger, Vietnam: 
A Dragon Embattled (New York: 
Praeger, 
1967, 2 vols .), I, 172-174. 
2. 
Ibid. 
3. 
Data on Vietnamese political parties is drawn principally from U.S. 
Department of State , Political Ali nments of Vietnamese Nationalists 
(Office of Intelligence Research , Report No . 3708, October 1, 1949 , 
passim. 
4. 
Ibid., 138 ff • 
.5. 
Ibid. 
6. 
Ibid., 31-32. 
7. Ibid., 36 
8. 
Ib id ., 138 ff . 
9. 
Ber nard B. Fall, ed., flo Chi Minh on Revolution (New York: 
Praeger , 
1967), 130-131. 
10. 
The Hitler-Stalin Pact was signed in August, 1939. 
On 26 September 1939, 
France outlawed the Communist Party. 
Ibid ., and Buttinger, ~ cit ., 
I, 224-226 . 
11. Ibid., 236-250 . 
12. Ibid., 242-244 . 
· t 
13. 
U.S. Dept of State , Political Alignments ... , op . cit., 58. 
14. 
Fall , ed ., Ho Chi Mirili on Revolution , op . cit., 133-134 
15. 
George Modelski , "The Viet Minh Complex," in Cyril E. Black and 
Thomas P. Thorton, eds ., Communism and Revol ution (Princeton : 
Princeton 
University Press, 1964), 189-190 . 
Cf. Bernard B. Fall, The Two Viet-Nains 
(Ne\,l York: 
Praeger , 2nd Edition, 1963 ), 62. 
16. 
Vo Nguyen Giap, People's War, Peo~le's Army (Hanoi , 1961), 75, quoted 
in ibid . 
17. U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments ... , op. cit., 60. 
18. 
Fall, The Two Viet-Nams, op . cit., 62-63. 
B-70 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
19. 
U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments ... , Ope cit., 54-55. 
20. 
Ibid. 
21. 
1. Milton Sacks, "Marxism in Vietnam," in Frank N. Trager, ed., 
Marxism in Southeast Asia (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1959), 
150 . 
22. 
Modelski, l oco cit., paraphrasing the official Vietnamese Communist 
Party history, Thhty Years of Struggle of the Party. 
23. 
Bert Cooper, John Killigrevl, Norman La Charite, Case Studies in Insur-
gency and Revolutionary Warfare: 
Vietnam 1941-1954 (Washington: Special 
Operations Research Office, The American University, 1964), 87-88. 
24. 
Modelski, Ope cit., 189, quoting Thirty Years ... 
25. 
Cooper, et al, 01) . cit., 88-89. 
French sources estimated 50,000 Viet 
Minh in Tonkin as of August, 1944; U.S. Dept of State, Political Align-
ments ... , Ope cit., 61. 
26. 
Cooper, et al, loco cit. 
27. 
Some French authors have been prone to credit the U.S. for Ho Chi Minh 
and the Viet Minh; e .g ., Lucien Bodard, The Quicksand War (Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1967),221-222. 
The ranking American official in northern 
Vietnam in 1945, Brigadier General Philip E. Gallagher, has attested: 
" ... throughout the months before the Japanese capitulation, O.S.S. 
officers and men operated behind Japanese lines, to arm, lead and train 
native guerrillas who were organized by the Viet Minh." 
(A situation 
report, undated, in the Gallagher Papers, quoted in Bert Cooper, John 
Killigrew, and Norman La Charite, Case Studies in Insurgency and Revolu-
tionary Warfare : 
Vietnam 1941-1954 ZWashington, D. C.: 
SpecialOpera-
tions Research Office, The American University, 1 96.!±1; 107.) 
But O.S.S. 
assistance to the Viet Minh-led guerrillas was quite limited , although 
it gave the Viet Minh the opportunity to proclaim that they were part 
of the Allied effort against the Japanese. 
Cf., Fall, Le Viet-Minh: 
La Republique Democratique du Viet-Nam LParis: 
Librairie Armand Colin, 
1962/, 34. 
Fall, Two Viet-Nams , Ope cit., 66-71, details the case 
for the postwar American aid and comfort to the Viet Minh, which adds 
up to a more substantial charge 
but similarly is without foundation 
in the record. 
28. 
Quoted in ibid., 63. 
29. 
U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments ... , Ope cit., 66-67, quoting 
The Factual Record of the August Revolution (Hanoi, September, 1946). 
30. 
Fall, ed., Ho Chi Minh on Revolution , Ope cit., 141-142. 
31. 
Buttinger, Ope cit., I, 435-436. 
B-71 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
32. 
U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments ... , Ope cit., 146-147. 
33. 
Hammer, Ope cit., 104. 
34. 
Marvin E. Gettleman, ed ., Viet Naill (New York: 
Fawcett, 1965),57-59. 
35. Buttinger, Ope cit., I, 325-327. 
36. Ibid., 328-331; Hammer , Ope cit., 115-116. 
37. 
Hammer, op. cit., 117, quoting Suprem~ Allied Command, Southeast Asia, 
Commission No.1, Saigon, Political History of French Indochina South 
of 160 , 13 September - 11 October 1945. 
38. u.s. Dept of State,.Political Alignments ... , op. cit., 73-74. 
39. 
Hammer, op. cit., 117 
40. 
Hammer, OF' cit., 120. 
41. 
Buttinger, OF' cit., I, 337 
42. 
Buttinger, op. cit., 351-354. 
43. 
Ibid. 
44. 
Buttinger, OF' cit., 356, 634. 
45. 
Ibid; Sacks, 0p. cit., 157; Fall, ed ., Ho on Revolution, op. cit., 146. 
46. 
Sacks, op. cit., 158. 
47. 
Ibid. 
48. 
U.S. Dept (·f State, Political Alignments ... , 77-78. 
I 
49. 
Hammer, op. cit., 150. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53· 
54. 
55· 
Buttinger, OF' cit., 371-372. 
Ibid., 399-401; U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments ... , op. cit., 
~ 
George A .. Carver ~ Jr., "The Faceless Viet Cong," Foreign Affairs 
(Vol. 
!~~ , No.3, Aprll, 1966 ), 350. 
, 
Buttinger, Ope cit., I, 402-403. 
I 
U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments ... , op. cit., 81-82. 
I 
Fall, Two Viet-Nams, ~it., 131. 
Hammer, OF' cit., 179. 
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.J 
, 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Pham Van Dong (presently Premier, then Vice President) announced in 
1950 that promulgation of the 1946 Constitution had been postponed 
"because several of its provisions require for their application the 
cessation of the state of war," and in 1951, after Ho had openly 
aligned with the Sino-Soviet powers, the Viet Minh radio explained 
that "a gang of traitors" had been evolved in its formulation, and 
hence a "progressive character ·was lacking." 
During the "Rectifica-
tion of Errors,1l in late 1956, after the peasant uprisings of that 
year, the DRV set up a constitutional reform committee. 
In December, 
1958, Ho invited the public to submit recommendations on a new draft 
basic law, and the second Constitution was promulgated in 1960. 
Ibid., 178-181; U.S. Dept of the Army, Pamphlet 550-40, u.s. Army 
Area Handbook for Vietnam (Washington: 
Government Printing Office, 
1962), 235. 
57. 
Gettl emen, ed., op. cit., 88-89. 
58. 
American Consulate General, Saigon, Despatch 34, February 12, 1949. 
59. 
Op. cit., 90-91. 
60. 
Vo Nguyen Giap, People's War,People ' s Army (Hanoi : 
Foreign Languages 
Publishing House, 1961), 35, also 67-108; Cf., rtLet Us Step Up The 
Theory-Formulating Task of The Party,1l Hoc Tap (No.9, September 1966), 
in Joint Publications Research Service, "Translations from Hoc Tap" 
(No. 38,660, November 16, 1966), 2. 
61 . 
Ibid. 
62. 
Fall, Ho on Revolution, 0p, cit., 206 ff . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B-73 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1. C. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
HO CHI MINH: 
ASIAN TITO? 
Sillll\fARY 
Among the more cogent critiques of U. S. policy tOl-lard Vietnam is 
the contention that the U.S. failed to recognize in Ho Chi Minh a 
potential Asian ItTito. It 
This vie"\-T holds that Ho has always been more 
concerned with Vietnam's independence and sovereign viability than 
with folloving the interests and dictates of Mosco"\-T and Peking. 
With 
U.S. support, the argument runs, Ho would have adopted some form of 
neutrality in the East-West conflict and maintained the DRV as a 
natural and. durable bulvlark against Chinese expansion southward . 
Thus, 
were it not for ItU.S. communist blinders,lt Ho vould have served the 
l arger purposes of American policy in Asia. 
Though the focus of inquiry 
in this study i s the period :iJmnediately folloving 1-lorld War II, "\vhen it 
would have been relatively easy to support an anti-Japanese, anti-
colonial Ho, it is often argued that the U.S. neglected another oppor-
tunity after the Geneva Conference of 195L~ -- and indeed, that U.S. 
. 
acceptance of Ho, and a communist dominated Vietnam, may be the only 
path to peace in Southeast Asi a today. 
The historical (1945-1954) 
argument has a persuasive ring. 
In the light of the present costs 
and repercussions of U. S. involvement in Vietnam, any prior "\-lay out 
can seem attractive. 
It is possible, hovever, that a dynamic and uni-
fied communist Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh could have been vigorously 
expansioni st, thus causing unanticipated difficult problems in some 
vays comparable to current ones. 
Many authors have advanced one version or another of the ItTitolt 
hypothesi s . 
Some develop the principal thesis that a different U.S. 
policy could have moved Ho to non-alig!lJUent and opposition to Peking; 
others stress the corollary that Ho was forced i nto dependence upon 
Peking and MOSCOl-l by American opposition or indifference. 
Whether Ho 
was a nationalist or a communist is not at issue; all of the authors 
quoted seem to accept that Ho ivas a communist, and that a communist 
Vietnam Hould. probably have eventuated under hi s leadership. 
Rather, 
thei r arguments center on vThat they perceive to be Ho' s villingness to 
subordinate communist goals, forms, and international discipline to 
attaining Vietnam ' s i ndependence and unity . 
A few openly favor a 
comraunist Vietnam on the grounds that only a national communism l ed 
by Ho "\-Tould be sufficiently strong to survive adjacent to China . 
They 
stress Ho ' s attempts in 1945 and 1946 to obtain Western backing, and 
point out that antipathy to China is a pillar of Viet nationalism. 
Many concede that the Tito analogy is not wholly appropriate . 
Unlike 
Tito, Ho came to power after the Har without the aid of another com-
munist state. More basically, there was no analogy t o be made until 
l ate 19L~8 , when the experiment with Tito s eemed like it would work. 
C-l 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Nonetheless, these authors point out that if the U.S. found it advan-
tageous to set aside its repugnance to Tito's communism in the interest 
of stermning Russian expansion ' in Europe, it should have been ,.rilling 
to accommodate Ho Chi Minh's communism for similar ends in Asia. 
This 
critique generally ends with the accusation that the U.S. purpose in 
Southeast Asia is simply and solely to stop communism. (Tab 1) 
An examination of Ho Chi Minh's political development through 1950 
may provide a basis to narrmr the range of speculation concerning Ho 
and U.S. policy. 
From such a review, it is evident that the man "Tho in 
1945 became President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam Ivas a mature, 
extraordinarily dedicated revolutionary who had undergone severe hard-
ships servj_ng the cause of Vietnam's freedom from France. 
Fifty-five 
years of age in 1945, he had been a communi st for t",enty-five years -_ 
one of the founding members of the French Communist Party -- and a Com-
intern agent in Asia for fifteen years before World War II. 
He was 
originally of Nghe-An, a province t raditionally a sPaivning ground of 
revolutionists; of a father imprisoned by the French for nationalist 
activism; and of a Hue school knmfll for radical nationalism among its 
students 0 
Exiled from Vietnam from 1910 to 1940, imprisoned in Hong. 
Kong and in China, deprived of home, f amily, fame, fortune and companion-
ship outside the Comintern 's conspiratorial Circles, he apparently devoted 
himself selflessly all those years to revolution in Vietnam . 
Ruth Fischer, 
a well-knoEn German former communist who knew Ho during this period, has 
written, "It was Ho Chi Minh~s nationalism which impressed us European 
Communists born and bred in a rather grey kind of abstract internationalism. " 
For Ho, now back in Asia, World War II opened ne"l<[ avenues to the 
attainment of his life-long goals. 
France discredited itself in Vietnam 
through Vichy's collaboration with the J apanese, and then in 1945 was 
toppled from power altogether by Japanese arms. 
In the meantime, Ho had 
built the Viet Minh into the only Vietnam-wide political organization 
capabl e of effective resistance to either the Japanese or the French. 
Ho was the only Vietnamese wartime leader with a national follo"ling, and 
he assured himself ,.rider fealty among the Vietnamese people When in 
August-September, 1945, he overthrew the J apanese, obtained the abdica-
tion of Bao Dai, established the DRV, and staged receptions for in-coming 
allied occupation forces --in which the DRV acted as the incumbent Viet-
namese government. 
For a fe\v weeks . in September 191~5, Vietnam ,.ras -- for 
the first and only time in its modern history -- free of foreign domin-
ation, and United from north to south under Ho Chi Minh. 
Ho beJame th~ focus of the nationalist fervor evoked by these and 
subsequent events. 
Leaders of the rival Vietnamese Nationalist Party 
(VNQDD) an~ the Revolutionary League (Dong Minh Hoi), although admitted 
to the DRV 'government, commanded no grass-roots organizations, and since 
they were closely associated .Tith the Chinese Nationalists, shared in 
I 
C-2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
full measure in the anti-Chinese odium among the people of North Vietnam. 
In South Vietnam, French intrigue, and Vietnamese disunity precluded the 
emergence of a competitor to Ho . 
vfuen France resorted to force to restore 
its control over Vietnam, Ho again became the head of Viet resistance, 
and the Viet Minh became the primary nationalist protagonists. 
Hence, 
Ho Chi Minh,both on his own merits and out of lack of competition, became 
the personification of Vietnamese nationalism. 
Ho, nonethel ess, found himself, his movement, and his government 
under intense pressure. 
From within the nation, the Chinese-backed Viet 
parties attacked communist domination of his government. 
For the sake 
of national unity, Ho dissolved the Communist Party, avoided communist 
cant, announced general elections, and assured the contending factions 
representation in the government well out of proportion to their popular 
support. 
External pressures from France and from China proved more diffi-
cult. 
The French capitalized on the relative veakness of the Viet Minh 
in South Vietnam, and the dissension among the Vietnamese there to over-
thrm,r the DRV government in Saigon, and to force the Viet Minh to resort 
to guerrj.lla v18rfare. 
In famine-wracked North Vietnam, Chinese hordes 
under booty-minded warlords descended on the DRV, supplanting its lo~al 
government with committees of their own sponsoring and systematically 
looting. 
Ho vainly sought aid abroadj not even the Soviet Union proved 
helpful. 
Ho eventually (March, 1946) negotiated with the French, accepting 
a French military presence in North Vietnam for a period of five years in 
r eturn for vague French assurances to the DRV as a IIFree State within the 
French Union. II 
When Ho vTaS attacked for this by the pro-Chinese elements 
wIthin the DRV, he declared: 
lIyou fools! 
Don It you realize vThat it means if the Chinese 
stay? Don't you remember your history? The last time the 
Chinese came, they stayed one thousand years! 
, 
"Th~ French are forei gners . 
They are '-leak. 
Colonialism 
is dying out. 
Nothing will be able to withstand world pressure 
for independence . 
They may stay for a while, but they will 
have to go because the ,·rhite man is finished in Asia. 
But if 
the Chinese stay nOvT, they vrill never l eave . 
"As for me, I prefer to sm~ll French shit for five years, 
rather than Chinese shit for the rest of my life. II 
The unl esolved historic problem, of course, is to what extent Ho's 
nationalist
l goals over-rode his communist convictions in these maneuvers. 
Ho seemed t.o place the former above the latter not solely as a matter of 
dissemblanc:e, as he might have done in the dissolution of the Party and 
the simulta'neous formation of a IIMarxist Association, II but possibly as 
a result o~ doubts about communism as a political form suitable for 
Vietnam. 
Bao Dai is reputed to have said that: 
III sal-l Ho Chi Minh 
suffer. 
He vas fighting a battle within himself. 
Ho had his own strug-
gle. 
He realized communism was not best for his country, but it was 
C-3 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
too late. Ultimately, he could not overcome his allegiance to com-
munism.!! 
During negotiations for a modu.s vivendi with the French in 
Paris in autumn, 1946, Ho appealed to the French to "save him 'from the 
extremists!! within the Viet Minh by some meaningful concession to Viet-
namese independence, and he told the UoS. Ambassador that he was not a 
communist. 
He is reputed to have asserted at that time that Vietnam 
was not ready for communism, and described himself as a Marxist. 
In 
reply to a journalist's inquiry, Ho claimed that he could remain neutral, 
!!like Svritzerland!! in the developing ,vorld povrer struggle between com-
munism and the West. 
But these and other such statements could have 
come either from a proper Leninist or a dedicated nationalist. 
HO's 
stat6nents and actions after 1949, and his eventual close alignment with 
the Sino-Soviet B+oc, support the Leninist construction. 
But, then, 
U.S. insistence on Ho "s being a doctrinaire communist may have been a 
self-fulfHling prophesy. (Tab 2) 
There remains, however, the matter of HOTS direct appeals for U.S. 
intervention in Vietnam, at which even a Leninist might have scrupled. 
These occurred (late 1945, early 1946) just after France has reasserted 
itself militarily in South Vietnam, while Chinese Nationalist warlords 
vrere ensconced in Hanoi, and before the 6 March 1946 Accord i-rith Franc'e. 
Desperately, Ho turned to the United States, among other pOl.,ers, asking 
for "immediate interference" in Vietnam. 
There were, at l east, eight communications from Ho to the President 
of the United States, or to the Secretary of State, from October, 1945, 
to February, 191~6. 
Ho had conveyed earlier, in August and September, ' 
1945, via O.S.S. channels, proposals that Vietnam be accorded lIthe same 
statusas the Philippines,!! for an undetermined period of tutelage pre-
liminary to independence. 
Hith the outbreak of hostilities in South 
Vietnam, September-October 1945, he added formal requests for U.S. and 
U.N. intervention against French aggression, citing the Atlantic Charter, 
the U.N. Charter, and a foreign policy address of President Truman in 
October, 1945, endorsing national self-determination. 
Ho's last direct t 
communication with the U.S. was in September, 1946, when he visited the 
U.S. Ambassador in Paris to ask vaguely for U.S. assistance in obtaining 
independence for Vietnam Hithin the French Union. 
r 
There is no record of U.S. reply to any of HO's appeals for aid. 
Extant instructions to a U.S. diplomat in contact with Ho in December, 
1946, reveal U.S. preoccupation with his knovm communist background, and 
apprehension that 'he might establish a "communist-dominated, MOSCOVl-
oriented state." Tvro months later) when the Franco-Viet Minh "rar in 
North Vietnam was underway, Secretary of State Marshall emphasized that 
"vle do not lose sight (Of the7 fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct Com-
munist connections and-it should be obvious that we are not interested 
in seeing colonial empire administrations supplanted by philosophy and 
political organizations emanating from and controlled by the Kremlin." 
c-4 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In May, 1949, Secretary of State Acheson admitted that as a "theoretical 
possibility" the establisbment of a "National Communist state on pat-
tE;:;rn Yugoslavia in any area beyond reach [Of th~7 Soviet Anny," but 
pointed out that: 
"Question whether Ho as much nationalist as Commie is 
irrelevant. All Stalinists in colonial areas are nationalists. 
With achievement national aims (i. e., independence) their 
objective necessarily becomes subordination state to Commie 
purposes and ruthless extermination not only opposition groups 
but all elements suspected even slightest deyiation .... " 
When, in early, 1950, HO's DRV lay within reach of Mao's Chinese Army, 
and Ho had openly embraced communism, Secretary Acheson declared that 
bloc recognition of the DRV "should remove any illusion as to the 
nationalist character of Ho Chi Minh's aims and reveals Ho in his true 
colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in Vietnam." 
But HO' s behavior in 1949-1950) hOVlever cQnvincingly it endorsed 
U.S. policy at that juncture, does not necessarily explain away his 
earlier eagerness for U.S. and U.N. intervention in Vietnam, nor other-
.rise gainsay the "Tito" hypothesis as applied to the 1945-1947 period. 
Of that period) it can be said that the U.S. offered Ho only narro\{ 
options. 
He received no replies to his appeals. 
After 1946, not only 
,·rere Ho's direct communications ,-lith the U.S. cut, but also the Signals 
he r eceived from the U.S. were hardly encouraging. 
By the time the 
Indochina war began in earnest in late 1946, U.S. military equipment 
had already been used by French forces against the Vietnamese) and the 
U.S. had arranged credit for France to purchase $160 million worth 
of vehicles and miscellaneous industrial equipment for use in Indochina. 
Secretary of State George C. Marshall's public comment on the outbreak 
of war in J anuary, 1947) 'Ivas limited to a hope that "a pacific basis 
for adjustment of the difficulties could be found," and vrithin six months 
the Marshall Plan threw even greater U.S. r esources behind France. 
i 
The simple truth seems to be that the U.S. knew little of what vras 
transpiring inside Vietnam) and certainly cared less about Vietnam than 
about France. 
Knowing little and caring l ess meant that real problems 
and variety of choices were perceived but dimly. 
For example) the U.S. 
could have asked itself -- "Did vre really have to support France in 
Southeast ~sia in order to support a non-communist France internally 
and in Euro;Pe?" 
Another question we could have asked ourselves .TaS --
"If the U.S. choice in Vietnam really came down to either French coloni-
alism or Ho Chi Minh, should Ho automatically be excluded?" Again, "If 
the U.S. choice was to be France, did France have any real chance of 
succeeding,1 and if so) at i-lhat cost?" 
I 
Even before '\vorld vlar II was over, Washington had placed the decision 
on Ho's fate in the hands of France. 
It can be argued, nonetheless) 
C-5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
that the U.S. could have insj_sted that Paris buy Ho and provide 
Indochinese independence without endangering the more basic relation-
ship between the U.S. and France in Europe. 
Just as the U.S. came to 
r ecognize the prime lllportance of Europe over any policy it pursued 
else"lhere) so the French government would have soon realized (if it 
had not already done so) that nothing should be done to :impair seriously 
U.S. acceptance Qf common interests in European recovery and collective 
security. 
Moreover) it was not as if there were not sizeable segments 
of the French community I-lhich "lOuld not have supported graceful UoS. 
attempts to extricate France from Indochina. 
It may 'IoTell be, hOiiever, 
that the !!Tito hypotheSiS If assumes a compl:i.ance from France of which 
France was demonstrably incapable. 
No French government is likely to 
have survived a genuinely liberal policy toward Ho in 19L~5 or 1946j 
even French communists then favored redemption of control in Indochina. 
From '46 on, hmlever, bloodshed hardened policy in France. 
As before, 
the Ho alternative was never seriously contemplated. 
French representations to the contrary notwithstanding) Ho Chi 
Minh possessed real political strength among the people of Vietnam. 
While calling Ho another George Washington may be stretching the point, 
there is no doubt about his being the only popularly-recognized "rar-
time leader of the Vietnmuese resistance, and the head of the strongest 
and only Vietnam-,\iide political movement. 
There can be no doubt either 
that in a test by ballot only HO's Viet Minh could have delivered votes 
at the hamlet level. 
Washington and Paris, however, did not focus on 
the fact of Ho's strength, only on the consequences of his rule. Paris 
vie\oled lIo as a threat to its regaining French economic, cultural and 
political prerogatives in Indochina. 
The U. S., \olary of Ho' s known 
communist background, was apprehensive that Ho would lead Vietnam into 
the Soviet, and later Chinese, orbit. 
President Eisenhower's later 
r emark about HO' s 1,rinning a free election in Vietnam with an 80% vote 
shone through the darkness of our vision about Vietnamj but U.S. policy 
remained unillumined. 
In the last speculation, U.S. support for Ho Chi Minh would have 
involved perspicacity and risk. 
As clear as national or independent 
or neutral communism may seam today, it "ras a blurred vision in 1945-
1948. 
Even with the benefit of seeing Tito successfully assert his 
independence, it would have been hard for Hashing-ton to make the leap 
from there to an analogy in Asia. 
Recourse to !!national communism!! in 
Vietnam as an eventual bul,\1ark against China, indeed, would have called 
for a perspicacity' unique in U.S. history. 
The risk was there, too. 
The r eality of HOTS strength in Vietnam could have worked seriously 
against U.S. interests as \olell as against Chinese Communist interests . 
HO's vell-knmm leadership and drive, the iron discipline and effective-
ness of the Viet Minh, the demonstrated fighting capability of his 
armies , a dynamic Vietnamese people under HO's control, could have pro-
duced a dangerous period of Vietnamese expansionism. 
Laos and Cambodia 
would have been easy pickings for such a Vietnam . 
Ho, in fact, always 
c-6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
'1'OP SECRET - Sensitive 
considered his leadership to extend to Indochina as a ,'lhole) and his 
party vTaS originally called the Indochinese Communist Party . 
Thailand) 
Malaya) Singapore) and even Indonesia) could have been next. 
It could 
have been the "domino theory" with Ho instead of Mao . 
And) it could 
have been the dominoes with Mao . 
This may seem implausible) but it is 
only slightly less of a bad dream than what has happened to Vietnam since . 
The path of prudence rather than the path of risk seemed the wiser choice. 
(Tab 3) 
I.C. 
DISCUSSION 
Tab 1 - Versions of the "Asian Tito" Hypothesis 
Tab 2 - A Political Biography of Ho Chi Minh) 1890-1950 
Tab 3 - Ho Chi Minh's Communications With the U.S.) 1945-1946 
C-7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I.C .1. 
1. C. 1. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VERSIONS OF THE "ASIAN TITO" HYPOTHESIS 
Following are extracts from authors who have advanced 
that Ho Chi Minh, with the stimulus of U.S. support, might 
a non-aligned or, at least} counter-Peking foreign policy. 
lary contention is that Ho "\-TaS forced to accept dependency 
Peking by American opposition or indifference. 
arguments 
have adopted 
The corol-
on Moscow and 
Generalizations 
(1) 
None argue that Ho was not a communist or that a communist 
Vietnam "\-[Quld not have eventuated under HO' s leadership. 
(2) 
Rather, they point out that Ho demonstrated willingness to 
subordinate communist goals and forms to attaining nationalist objectives .. 
They accept a communist Vietnam, indeed even favor it, on the grounds that 
only a national communism led by Ho would be sufficiently strong to main-
tain independence of the Chinese. 
(3) 
They stress the historic Vietnamese antipathy to the Chinese 
as a pillar of Viet nationalism} and point to Ho' s attempts in 191~5 and 
1946 to obtain Western backing . 
(l~ ) 
No really elose parallel can be drmrn behleen the origins of 
Ho Chi Minh and Tito, since unlike Tito} Ho fought his way to pOl .... er in 
virtual isolation} without the intervention of an external communist 
power. 
However} it can be accurately said that U.S. policies in Europe 
have generally been directed at widening the split betw·een Tito and 
Moscow, while in Asia} our policy has tended to force Ho into closer 
relations with Peking and Hanoi. 
(5) 
The "Tito" issue raises pOintedly the question of whether U.S. 
strategy in Asia is anti-comrnunist or anti-Chinese. 
Since to block 
Soviet expahsion in Europe the U.S. set aside its repugnance to Tito's 
communism, it is argued, the U.S. should similarly renounce its opposition 
to Ho to serve its larger strategic interests in Asia. 
I 
Synopses 
I 
Isaacs} Harold; 
No Peace for Asia. 
In 1947, Ho was motivated by a deep nationaiism aimed 
princ~pally at independence, and was sorely disenchanted 
with communism} having received little or no help or 
encou~agement fr om foreign parties . 
Literally the U.S. 
was the only pOl .... er to whom Viet nationalists could turn 
with hope, but even then the U.S. actions in support of 
France stood in contrast to its principled pronouncements 
in favor of self-determination and against colonialism .. ...• C-ll 
c-B 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Shaplen, Robertj The Lost Revolution. 
There was a strong possibility in 1945 and 1946 that French 
and American policy could have "Titofied" Ho Chi Minh, and 
that Vietnam--albeit under left-wing leadership--might have 
been a bulvlark against Communist Chinese expansion. 
But 
the possibility of Vietnam's nOVl becoming a Yugoslavia is 
remote ..................................................... . 
Zinn, Hovlardj Vietnam: 
The Logic of Withdrawal. 
A Communist government in Vietnam is the best avenue for 
improving the lot of the Vietnamese; Ho Chi Minh's dicta-
torship would be preferable to any elitist dictatorship in 
South Vietnam. 
If the U.S. wants to contain China, the 
U.S . should .recognize that Ho Chi Minh vlould strive to 
mainta in his independence, and thus would accomplish what 
our military force cannot .•........•..............•...•..... 
Bator, Victorj Vietnam: 
A Diplomatic Tragedy. 
1954: 
China is most important problem facing Vietnam. 
Double-satellite r elationship affords the DRV potential 
independence. 
Diem's fanaticism obtruded .....•.••..•. ....•. 
Sacks, Milton; 
"Marxism in Southeast Asia." . 
1946-19~·9: 
Ho attempted to preserve neutrality, although 
this conflicted ,-lith his desire for international support 
and recognition for DRV ...........................•......... 
Butt inger, Joseph; Vietnam: 
A Dragon Embattled . 
1946-1947: 
Ho realized that he could not rally Vietnamese 
c-14 
C-1S 
C-ill 
C-21 
to his struggle for independence ,-lith the banner of com-
munism. 
Hence, the facade of democracy to lend righteousness 
to the forcefui communist campaign to align the people with 
the Viet Minh and the DRV .......•.......•.............•...... C-23 
Kennedy, John F., quoted in Schlesinger, Arthur M., ed., 
A Thousand Days. 
1951: 
U.S. has joined France in a desperate attempt to 
preserve empire. 
U.S. must not rely on arms alone to halt 
southward thrust of comraunism, but must harness nationalism •. C-24 
Schlesinger, Arthur M.j The Bitter Heritage. 
The most eff~ctive bulwark against an aggressive communist 
state may well be national communism. 
A rational U.S. 
policy aimed at containing China could have recognized 
communist Vietnam in 1954, vice backing a shaky Saigon 
r egime led by right-wing mandarins or generals ...••.......... C-25 
Fall, Bernard B.j Viet-Nam Witness. 
The Vietnamese Communists had to conduct their revolution 
vTithout aid from abroad, even from French Communists ..•...... c-26 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-9 
t 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Eden, Anthony) Earl of Avon; Toward Peace in Indochina. 
. 
The HO-Peking relationship is not a close parallel to the 
Tito-Moscow one. 
Yet Ho has much to gain from neutrality, 
and much at risk in failing to maintain its MoscmJ links, 
or to open a way to American vTithdr8iJal. ..•................• C-27 
Fulbright, Senator J. William; The Arrogance of Power. 
Ho Chi Minh is the only truly national leader of the 
Vietnamese; he is also a communist. 
Vietnamese communism 
is perhaps the only potential bulwark against Chinese 
domination. 
Hence, the U.S. should try to come to terms .... C-28 
Reischauer) Edwin 0.; "What Choices Do We Have In Vietnam? " 
The U.S. could have taken a stand against colonialism in 
1945) refused to support France in 1950, backed the 
Geneva settlement in 1954, and declined to increase its 
military commitment in 1961. 
Four Presidents rejected 
the alternative of furthering Ho Chi Minh ' s cause, but 
had any done so) the outcome ,wuld have been a highly 
nationalist Vietnam fiercely independent of China. 
More-
over, Ho's cordial World War II relations with the U.S o 
indicated a potential for a Tito-like U.S.-Vietnam relation-
ship of no more baleful consequences for Southeast Asia 
than the present ,mr-torn states . 
But a nationalist Viet-
nam would be far preferable, from the U.S. long-range 
viewpoint) to status quo .................................... C-29 
t 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-IO 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt from No Peace for Asia ~y Harold Isaacs, 1947, quoted in 
Viet Nam: 
History) Documents, and Opinions on a Major World Crisis, 
Marvin E. Gettleman, ed., 1965, pp. If9-50, 53-55. 
Ho Chi Minh was born in the province of Vinh, in northern Annam. 
"The home of revolutionists," the Annamites call that place with its 
sparse hills and valleys, its thickly crmlded population. 
From out 
of that mass grubbing in the soil to live has come a peculiarly large 
proportion of Indochina's greatest national leaders. 
As a boy of 
twelve, Ho began his revolutionary career as a courier, carrying 
messages from village to village for his conspiring elders. 
Today, 
at fifty-five, he likes to think of himself as a man who has cast 
aside parties and programs . 
He speaks not in class political terms 
but in nationalist terms. 
"My party is my country, " he liked to say; 
'my program is independence ." In long discussions we had of the 
problems of the Nationalist movement in general and in Indochina in 
particular, he would impatiently wave aside all misgivings. 
"Inde-
pendence is the thing;" he said. 
"What follows \.,rill follOl'I. 
But 
independence must come first if there is to be anything to follOl.,r at 
all later on." 
-x-
-x- * 
Upon ,\-Thom could /Jhe Vietnamese no!!..,7 ... count? Certa inly not now 
upon the Chinese . 
China was so immensely larger than the little 
Republic of Vietnam--and perhaps there would come a day when China 
would have realized her capacities and ass~led her place as the leader 
of Asia. 
On that day Vietnam "Tould profit, perhaps, from being China's 
neighbor. 
But China now was \feak and assailed, r ent by internal 
struggles and external pressures . 
It was ruled by the kind of men 
who '\-Tere in northern Indochina now, sucking at the land like leeches. 
Because they held the French at arm's length, they were temporarily 
helpful. 
But that could not last. 
~he Chinese \.,rere already negoti-
ating their settlement with the French and \{Quld be interested only in 
gaining their mm immediate ends . 
From those ends, Annamite nationalism 
had little enough to gain. 
What of the Russians? Would they bring any strong political sup-
port to the Annamite cause? 
I met no Annamite who thought so; and I 
spoke to many Annamite Communists. 
The Annamite Communists, like all 
their fellOl" nationalists, suffered from a terrifying sense of their 
isolation. 
They were unusually frank and cynical about the Russians. 
Even the most orthodox among them, like shaggy-haired Dran Van Giau, 
the partisan organizer, granted that the Russians went in for "an excess 
of ideological compromise," and said he expected no help from that 
quarter, no matter hOI" distant or verbal it might be. 
"The Russians 
are nationalists for Russia first and above all," another An..l1amite 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-ll 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Communist said .,ith some bitterness . 
"They would be interested in us 
only if vie served some purpose of theirs. 
Right now, unfortunately, 
VTe do not seem to serve any such purpose." 
"HOI., about the French Communists?" 
I asked. 
He snorted with 
disgust. 
"The French Communists," he said, "are Frenchmen and coloni-
alists first and Communists after. 
In principle they are for us, but 
in practice? Oho, that is quite another thing!" 
One of the top-
ranking Annamite Communists spoke contemptuously of Thorez, who in a 
Paris speech has said he Has in favor of the Annamites "finally arriving 
at their independence." 
He laughed sourly. 
"A fine rubber phrase, is 
it not? 
You can stretch it into any shape or any meaning. 
They are 
the dominant party in France now. 
And look what Frenchmen are doing 
now in Indochina." 
"From the small handful of French Communists in Indochina, the 
Annamite comrades learned a remarkable lesson in their kind of politics. 
There Here only twenty in the French Communist group in Saigon. 
"Of 
these only one, " said my Annamite Communists companion, "only one soli-
darized with us. 
The rest stood aside ." The French group prepared a 
document for the Indochinese Communist Party which bore the date of 
September 25--two days after the French had seized pover in the city. 
I Vias able to read the document, but not to copy it, so. the notes I made 
immediately afterward are not verbatim. 
But the substance was as 
folloW's: 
It advised the Annami te Communists to be sure, before they 
acted too rashly, that their struggle "meets the requirements of Soviet 
policy." It warned that any "premature adventures II in Annamite inde-
pendence might "not be in line "lith Soviet perspectives.!f These 
perspectives might ,,,ell include France as a firm ally of the USSR in 
Europe, in which case the Annamite independence movement vlOuld be an 
embarrassment. 
Therefore it urged upon the Annamite comrades a policy 
of "patience. " It advised them in particular to wait upon the results 
of the French elections, coming up the following month, in October, 
when additional Communist strength might assure the Annamites a better 
settlement. 
In the meantime it baldly proposed that an emissarJ be 
sent not only to contact the French Communist Party but also the 
Russians !fin order to acquaint yourselves with the perspectives of 
coming events." 
, 
This document displayed with remarkable and unusual bluntness the 
Communist ~artyls notion of the relation between a revolutionary move-
ment and Soviet foreign policy. 
It apparently came as a shock to the 
Annamite Cbmmunists, who were thro'wn into considerable confusion by it. 
There vrBS a sharp internal argument within the party 'I-lhich ended in a 
decision to dissolve the party entirely, to cease functioning \-lithin 
the Vietmi~h as a distinct unit but to \-lork in it purely as individuals. 
In this "{By the party apparently figured on avoiding any responsibility 
at a time vhen its responsibility was the heaviest. 
I do not knOVT what 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the internal development ,.,ras in any detail) but I do know that the 
Annamite Communists I met were men bitten deeply with the bitterness 
of having been abandoned by their ideological comrades overseas. 
They had conse~uently taken refuge in a pure and simple nationalism~ 
Ho Chi Minh was making no idle phrase when he said: 
liMy party is my 
country." 
They were oppressed) in common with all the non-Communist 
Annamite nationalist leaders) by a fearful sense of loneliness. 
There 
seemed to be support for them against the French nowhere) none from 
the Chinese they could count on) none that could be anticipated from 
the Russians) none from the French Communists) l-rho did gain enormous 
strength in those October elections without effecting any noticeable 
change in Indochinese affairs. 
What then of the United States? 
Annamite nationalists spoke of the United States as men speak of 
a hope they knOl.,r is forlorn but to which they desperately cling all 
the same. 
Could all the fine phrases of the Atlantic Charter) of the 
United Nations pact) of President Roosevelt and his successor) really 
have meant nothing at all? Nothing? All right) let us make allOl.,rances 
for expediency) for big-power politics; for all the shabby realities. 
Would not the United States still find it wiser for the sake of its 
position in the Far East to "\-rin support among the people rather than 
to cling to the rotten imperial system of the past? It seemed not. 
For the only indication the Annamites had of America 's role in their 
struggle came in the form of lend-lease weapons and e~uipment being 
used against them by the French and British) and the stunning announce-
mentof an American deal with France for the purchase of $160)000)000 
worth of vehicles and miscellaneous industrial e~uipnlent for the French 
in Indochina. 
To the Annamites this looked like hnerican underwriting 
of the French recon~uest. The Americans were democrats in words but 
no help in fact) just as the Russians were communists in '-lOrds but 
no help in fact. 
IIWe apparently stand ~uite alone)" said Ho Chi-minh 
simply. 
IIWe shall have to depend on ourselves. II 
C-13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(
' 
Excerpt from The Lost Revolution by Robert Shaplen 
Chapter II - Ho Chi Minh - the Untried Gamble, pp. 27, 46-50 
I have always shared the belief of many, if not most, observers 
who were in Indochina at the time that a serious mistake was made by 
both the French and the Americans, especially by the dominant French 
policymakers in Paris, in not dealing more realistically with Ho in 
1945 and 1946, when there was a strong possibility that he might have 
been "Ti tofied" before Ti to and Ti toi sm Ivere ever heard of ; that the 
whole course of events might thereby have been altered and a great 
deal of bloodshed averted; and that today a unified Vietnam, even 
under some form of left-wing leadership, might have been the bulvmrk 
of a neutral bloc of Southeast Asian states seeking, above all, to 
avoid Chinese Cownunist domination. 
Some of the highest ~ne rican 
officials have privately told me, in recent years, that they now 
believe the gamble with Ho should have been taken; in fact, a con-
siderable number of them are again talking about Vietnam becoming a 
SOllLtheast Asian Yugoslavia, a possibility that seems to me nOvl rather 
remote . 
* * * 
In Biarritz, where he first rested, in Paris and then at the 
conference in Fontainebleau, Ho enjoyed huge personal success. 
He 
charmed everyone, especially the press. 
He distributed roses to girl 
reporters, signed his name in blood for an American male correspondent . 
He was vlidely compared to Confucius, to the Buddha, to St. John the 
Baptist, to anyone I s doting grandfather, and it was noted that he 'ws 
an ascetic, since, among other things, he refused to take a drink. 
Everyvrhere he went, whether to the opera, to a fancy reception, to 
a picnic, or to a press conference, he appeared in his simple, high-
buttoned linen work suit. 
"As soon as one approaches this frail man, 
one shares the admiration of all men around him, over whom he towers 
with his serenity acquired from wide experience," wrote one reporter . 
Noting his "tormented fa.ce and his eyes of blue which burn with an 
inner light," another declared that he "hides a soul of steel behind 
a fragile body." 
His wit, his Oriental courtesy, his savoir-faire, 
his mixed profundity and playfulness in social intercourse, his open 
love for children, above all his seeming Sincerity and simplicity, 
captured one and all. 
Unfortunately, in point of accomplishment Hols trip was far less 
successful. 
The fault, nOvr generally admitted, was chiefly that of 
c-14 
TOP SECRET -
Sensitiv~ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the French) who, 1-7hile the conference .vent on) continued to violate 
its spirit by further fostering the idea of the separate south and 
central federation in Indochina .... 
When he and Sainteny finally flelv up to Paris for the start of the 
talks, Sainteny described him as Itpale) eyes brilliant, and tight-
throated) II and he quoted Ho as saying) when the plane 1-TaS settling down, 
IIAbove all) don't leave me, whatever you do.
1t 
As the conference dawdled 
in the shadmr of defeat, by now the result of the activities of the 
Vietminh extremists in Hanoi as well as of the French maneuvers in 
Cochin China) Ho grew more and more restless. 
Sainteny agreed he ought 
to return to Hanoi as soon as possible. 
IIWhat 1-Tould I be able to do if 
I went home empty~handed?1I Ho asked. 
IIDon't let me l eave this way,lt 
he begged Sainteny and Marius Moutet, the Socialist Minister of Overseas 
Territories. 
IIArm me against those who would seek to displace me. 
You 
'will not regret it. It 
It 1-laS a significant plea, as significant as what 
Ho said on another evening to Sainteny and Moutet, ItIf we have to fight) 
we will fight. 
You will kill ten of our men and He will kill one of 
yours , and in the end it will be you who will tire of it. It 
At midnight on September 14, 1946, the frail figure of Ho Chi Minh) 
in its military tunic) walked out of the Hotel Royal-Monceau in Paris 
(the Fontainebleau sessions had ended ) and strolled to Moutet's house 
nearby. 
There Ho and Moutet signed a modus vivendi) which, while it 
underlined Vietnamese (and some French) concessions for safeguarding 
French rights in Indochina) only postponed agreement on basic political 
questions; it at least placed upon the French the responsibility for 
r estoring order in Cochin China . 
This was nothing more than had been 
agreed to in the spring and been vitiated since) but Ho publicly called 
the modus vivendi IIbetter than nothing. II 
He murmured to a security 
officer who accompanied him back to the hotel early in the morning) how-
ever) III have just signed my death warrant. II 
Despite the failure of his mission) Ho) in his true cosmopolitan 
fashion, had enjoyed his stay in Paris) a city he had always loved. 
Years before) standing on a bridge across the Seine) he had remarked 
to a Communist comrade) It\fuat a 1-Tonderful city) what a vronderful scene': 11 
When his friend had replied that Moscow was also beautiful) Ho had 
t 
said) IIMoscow is heroic, Paris is the joy of living. II 
During the 1946 
conference, Ho had revisited some of his former haunts and) mixing 
socially with several foreign correspondents) had talked freely about 
himself and his politics. 
"Everyone has the right to his own doctrine, " 
he had said. 
ItI studied and chose Marx. 
Jesus said two thousand years 
ago that one should love one's enemies. 
That dogma has not been realized. 
When will Marxism be realized? 
I cannot anS1-Ter .... To achieve a CO!.llIllunist 
society, big industrial and agricultural production isnecessary .•.. I do 
not know when that 1-Till be r ,ealized in Vietnam) where production is Imr. 
We are not yet in a position to meet the conditions. 1I 
C-15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
HO's self-analysis) in relation to Indochina's development is a 
markedly honest one) in Marxist terms . 
From the outset) Marxism was 
far more than a blueprint for him. 
It was a logique ) and as one of 
the keenest Indochina scholars) Paul Mus) has pointed out) it was 
acquired by Ho as a vital vlestern vTeapon, an arsenal in fact) with 
which) as an Asian) he could combat his French masters. 
Ho, as a 
Marxist) was quick to appreciate how his country was being robbBd) 
kept in economic penury by a purposefully unimaginative colonial pOl,er. 
Vlhile the French took out rubber or rice or whatever else they wanted 
and sold it in the .Torld marker at a high profit, the Vietnamese lived 
under a system in vlhich only human l abor and not money) in any inter-
national sense) counted; goods were in effect bartered for subsistence. 
Such an economic condition became the fulcrum of Ho's anger and drove 
him way back~ almost inevitably) to Marxism and thence to Communism. 
IIHo had to build on what every Asian must build per se)" Mus says, Ifa 
West ern logic to deal .. ,ith us Europeans . 
Vlhether it be a profession 
such as the law or medicine or what have you) an Asian must find this 
logique or be lost. 
Ho found it first in Marxism and he became a 
Leninist, since Lenin was faced in Russia with the same problem of the 
vacuum at the village l evel. 
Ho was successful because he r emained true 
to Leninism and Marxism. 
In this sense, straightforward according to 
his view) he belongs to a proper fraternity. If 
Along with Sainteny) Mus is one of those Frenchmen who admit that 
France and the Western world missed a proper opportunity with Ho in 
1946. 
Mus himself) as a French negotiator) met Ho a year later) and 
he has the same queer fondness for him most men "ho knew him have 
retained. 
III have no reason) as a Frenchman) to like Ho for what he 
has done) II Mus told me long afterward) IIbut still I like him. 
I am 
not afraid to say so. 
I like him for his strong mind. 
Although he 
is a great actor--one cannot afford to be naive vrith him--he does not 
go back on his word. 
He believes in the truth as he sees it. 
But he 
is .a Marxist) and that is where vre part company." 
He quotes Ho as 
telling him) in 1947) "My only weapon is anger ..•. I won't disarm my 
people until I trust you." 
Ho' s willingness to deal with the French) 
Mus believes) was largely predicated on his need for French advice) above 
all for financial advisers. 
"Marxist doctrine calls for the proletarian 
state to use) at least temporarily) the accountancy of the bourgeois-
capitalist countries)" Mus says. 
Because of the inbred economy imposed 
by the Bank of Indochina) Ho knew that Vietnam could not stand on its 
own feet) either in terms of money or trade. 
He also kne" he could not 
rely on the colonial French. 
His political approach was through metro-
politan France. 
He wasn 't convinced that this was his only chance) but 
he ,-TaS determined to play the possibilities. 
He wavered between his 
affection and regard for France) which had given him his self in the 
Marxist image) and his new' disillusion of 1946. 
"If we had supported 
c-16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
him more strongly then) " Mus added) "we might have won .... We thought 
vre could crush him if it came to war . 
We did not appreciate how hard 
he could fight. 
But vIe must not forget that he really wanted an agree-
ment "lith France at the time of Fontainebleau because it would have 
served him. 
That part of his motivation afterward died, of course) but 
vre should understand that it existed at the time and that he was truly 
disappointed. " 
TOP SECRET - Sensi tive · 
C-17 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt from Vietnam: 
The Logic of Withdrawal, 1967, by Howard. Zinn 
Pages 101-102 
The perspective of history suggests that a united. Vietnam under Ho 
Chi Minh is preferable to the elitist d.ictatorship of the South, just as 
Maoist China with all its faults is preferable to the rule of Chiang, and 
Castro's Cuba to Batista 's. 
We do not have pure choices in the present, 
although we should. never surrender those values which can shape the future. 
Right now, for Vietnam, a Communist government is probably the best avenue 
available to that whole packet of human values which make up the common 
morality of mankind. today; the preservation of human life, self-determination, 
economic security, the end. of race and. class .oppression, and. that fre edom 
. of speech and. press which an educated. population begins to demand .. 
In the d.ebate on Vietnam, there has been little or no d.iscussion on 
exactly what \'lOuld. b e the evil consequences of a united. Communis t Vietnam. 
It has b ecome an article of f a ith that ",hat is good. or bad. in international 
relations is a matter of cow-ting up the countries that are on the Commun-
ist sid.e, and. the number that are on our side. 
There is the black eye, 
and. there is the feather in the cap. 
And the difference is \vorth a moun-
tain of corpses. 
We need. to get accustomed. to the idea that there "dll be more Commun-
ist countries in the world., and. that this is not necessarily bad.. 
The 
physical security of the United. States is not diminished. by that fact in 
itself; Communist nations in their internationa l affairs b ehave very much 
like other nations (this is why they are so often disappointing to their 
sympathizers); some are friendly, some are hostile. 
Each is a unique re-
sultant of Marxist theory and. local cond.itions . 
The more there are, the 
greater diversity there will be among them. 
It is several years nO"T sinte 
scholars in the field. of Communist studies began taking note of "polycen-
trism," but American officials still often act as if there ",ere one Commun-
ist center in the ",orld .. 
One thing we should. have learned. by now is that Communist nations are 
as prone to the emotion of nationalism as other nations; they crave ind.e-
pend.ence and. resist domination by any other nation, whether capitalist or 
Communist. 
What this means is that a small but effective Communist nation 
which is neighbor to a large one can guard. its independence far better 
than a non-Communi st, semifeudal dictatorship. 
A Communist Vietnam und.er 
Ho Chi Minh can be expected. to retain its ind.ependence as surely as Tito 
has maintained. his. 
The idea of "conta inment" has always been ambiguous: 
Is it our aim 
to contain China, or to contain Communism? 
And. if it is both, then \vhat 
do we do if the two aims turn out to be in conflict 1'li th one-another? 
C-lS 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
To base our entire Asian policy on "containing" China is to risk 
billions of d.ollars and. thousands of lives on the id.ea that China plans 
to take over other countries by military expansion -- a hypothesis not 
supported. either by her words or by the history of her behavior so far, 
and. one that in the case of the Soviet Union turned. out to be false. 
And. 
to make the hypothesis d.oubly faulty, it assumes that even if China wanted 
to expand., she could .. 
C-19 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt fram Vietnam: 
A Diplamatic Tragedy by Victar Batar, 1965 
Pages 226-227 
In spite .of the dangeraus geagraphic praximity .of China and the earlier 
d.epend.ence .of Ha Chi Minh an Chines e military suppart, there was, in 1954, 
same passibility that Ha Chi Minh's gavernment might have been amenable ta 
diplamatic cantacts laaking ta real stabilizatian. 
He had. in his gavern-
ment several nan-Marxists wha might have helped. such an und.ertaking. 
Viet-
nam's millennial histary is filled. with intermittently successful attempts 
ta free the cauntry fram Chinese dominatian. 
"The mast impart ant questian 
facing bath Narth and. Sauth Vietnam," wrate an anti-Diem and. anti-Cammunist 
Vietnamese .of high repute, "is haw ta safeguard. the future .of the whale 
Vietnamese natian naw threatened. by such number and. such great dynamism 
(.of the Chinese)." 
Narth Vietnam's double-satellite relatianship (ta Mascaw and. Peking) 
patentially creates a limited. measure .of ind.epend.ence fram bath. 
The Viet~ 
namese Cammunists turned. ta Russia and. her Eurapean satellites far the 
help they need.ed. after Geneva in .order ta recaver fram the d.evastatians· 
.of a seven-year civil "rar. 
With this help Narth Vietnam may naw be increas-
ingly ind.epend.ent .of China. 
Even if the rank and. file .of the lead.ership 
were imperviaus ta the prid.e .of independ.ence, it is a safe assumptian that 
Ha Chi Minh himself, naw an "elder statesman" .of the Cammunist warld., is 
nat unlike ather na tianal lead.ers: 
He mast certainly does nat enj ay being 
a mere puppet. 
He seems ta have the talent and subtlety ta maneuver between 
the Scylla and. Charybdis .of cammitment ta China and. Russia. 
Thus, dipla-
macy d.irected. at real neutralizatian .of Vietnam, even if nat fully appraved 
by Peking, might have achieved. same success in the years 1955-1960. 
Of 
caurse, ta the irrecancilable fanatic, Diem, any cantact ",ith Ha Chi Minh 
wauld. have ,been anathema. 
But American palicy was nat necessarily cand.emned. 
ta serve ~. Diem's nervaus system, especially since there was plenty .of 
oppasitian ta him amang his awn cauntrymen. 
I I 
C-20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt from "Marxism in Vietnam" by Milton Sacks, in Marxism in 
Southeast Asia, Frank N. Trager, ed., 1959. 
Pages 163-164 
During this same period (1946-1949), the Ho Chi Minh government 
carefully sought to maintain friendly relations with the Thai and 
Nationalist Chinese governments. 
In addition, a determined propaganda 
effort was made to enlist the sympathy of the other Southeast Asian 
states for the Vi e~namese struggle. 
In the developing cold war situ-
ation that polarized international relations, the Viet Minh leadership 
publicly refused to take sides and announced a policy of neutrality. 
Even when the Soviet Union and the world Communist press affirmed that 
Ho Chi Minh ,-TaS a· Communist or stressed th~t the Democratic Republic of 
Viet-Nam was part of the "world Democratic Front" fighting against 
"American imperialism, It the Viet-Nam government itself mainta ined a 
·discreet silence. 
The Vietnamese COTIMunists did not feature the usual 
pro-Soviet, anti-American vituperative attacks so common to the world 
Communist movement. 
As late as March 191~9 , President Ho Chi Minh con-
tinued to denounce the charge of "communist domination" of the govern-
ment he headed as "pure French imperialist propaganda." 
This policy of denying links to Communism conflicted with the 
Ho Chi Minh government's practice of strengthening the ties between 
mass organizations in Viet-Nam and the agencies of international Com-
munism. 
Supporters of the Viet Minh government claimed that this 
practice was the only ""ray the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam was able 
to get some international recognition. 
The conflict was there none-
theless, and such participation in front organizations raised difficulties: 
for example, when representatives of the youth organizations in the 
Democratic Republic of Vietnam attended the r egional meeting of the 
World Federation of Democratic Youth at Calcutta in February 191~. 
Since 
this meeting ""TaS used as a means of publicly emphasizing the nevr Communist 
strategy in Southeast Asia that led to Communist insurrections in Malayat 
Burnla and Indonesia, the Vietnamese representatives were placed in an 
ambiguous position. 
They could and did point with pride to the "libera-
tion struggle" that they had been ,¥aging. 
Yet, at the same time, they 
did not repudiate the avowedly successful policy of coalition with the 
Itnational bourgeOisie It pursued in Viet-Nam. 
They simply avoided the 
issue posed by the new policy that stressed attacks on the "bourgeois 
nationalists, " the need for Communist party leadership of liberation 
struggles, and the necessity of direct ties with the Soviet world camp. 
This deviation from general Southeast Asian Communist policy during 
19~-49 may be described as another demonstration of the tactical flexi-
bility of Ho Chi Minh's leadership. 
The Viet Minh ""TaS already leading 
to a highly effective armed struggle against the French in Viet-Nam and 
enjoyed the support of many Vietnamese nationalists who believed the 
non-Communist declarations of the spokesmen for the Democratic Republic 
of Viet-Nam. 
Moreover, its government had a measure of sympathy and 
C-21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
support internationally from non-Cormnunist, anticolonialist world 
oplnlon. 
To squander these assets simply to enunciate idealogical 
statements commensurate with Communist-bloc pronouncements would 
have been a high price to pay at any time. 
Yet, the view may well 
be entertained that Ho Chi Minh and some other Viet Minh leaders wanted 
the greater measure of independence that nonalignment ivith either bloc 
would afford, and hoped perhaps to escape thereby the inevitable polar-
ization of the nationalist movement in Viet-Nam with all its attendant 
negative consequences . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C- 22 
\. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpts from Vietnam: 
A Dragon Embattled. (Vol I: 
From Colonialism to 
the Viet Minh) by Joseph Buttinger, 1967 
Pages 406-408 
But no one kne,v better than Ho Chi Minh that the struggle for 
ind,epend,ence could not be conducted, und.er the banner of Communism. 
The 
establishment of an open dictatorship of their party would only have brought 
about the colla'pse of the ingenious political ed,ifice through which they 
dominated, the entire nationalist movement. 
The more the regime evolved 
toward, one-party rule, ,the greater became the need. for clemocratic rhetoric 
and, ritual, and, for a splendid, facad,e of democratic institutions. 
The 
consti tution submitted, to the Assembly was designed, for this JZUrpose . 
It was adopted" with 240 .against 2 votes, on November 8 594',2/. 
* 
-l(-
7(-
If the lofty principles of this constitution had, no influence on the 
political evolution of the Hanoi regime, the reason is not that the out-
break of the war several weeks l ater prevented, the D.R.V.N. from realizing 
the promis e contained, in its name. 
The Communists determined, the nature 
of the regime even more after the outbreak of the vTar than before, . and, 
.as far as they were concerned, the purpose of the constitution was not to 
create the basis for a democratic regime: It was their contention, in 
Vietnam no l ess than in the "people's democracies" of Eastern Europe, that 
the regime they had, set up was d,emocratic, vTas in f act a "higher form of 
democracy" than existed, in any Western state. Outsiders, and, especially 
people who believe that Communist political theory is basically d,ishonest, 
find, this hard, to understand,. 
But the democratic principles of the con-
stitution were laid, dOvTn not merely as a means to camouflage the progressive 
d,eveiopment of the regime tow'ard a Communist-led, one-pa,rty dic:tatorship. 
These freedoms were meant for the entire people, to be d,enied, only to 
"reactionaries," "traitors," "collaborators, " "troublemakers ," and other 
"enemies of the people," in brief' anyone whose political activities the 
Communists considered, harmful to the national cause , the political and, 
organizational custod.ian of which was the Viet Minh and l ater the Lien 
Viet. 
Even Jefore the armed, conflict spread, over the entire country, the 
Communists ifelt perfectly justified, in d,emanding that their nationalist 
rivals exercise their political rights only in support of the Viet Minh 
regime. 
Opposition to the Viet Minh was synop~ous with acting against 
the interests of the state. 
'l'here is no d,enying that the Communists in-
troduced, rad,ical c1,emocratic reforms such as Vietnam had, never known before, 
and. that they established, almost every known type of d,emocratic institu-
tion. 
But is is equally true that they had, no compunction about i mpri son-
ing or even murdering people who tried, to enjoy these reforms or use these 
institutions to oppose the Viet Minh. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-23 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt from Arthur M. Schlesinger, A Thousand Days : 
John F. Kennedy 
in the White House, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 1965, p. 321. 
1951: 
"In Indochina, II Kennedy said, on his return to Washington, 
'\re have allied ourselves to the desperate effort of a French regime 
to hang on to the remnants of empire .... To check the southern drive 
of communism makes sense but not only through reliance on the force 
of arms. 
The task is rather to build strong native non-communist 
sentiment w·ithin these areas and rely on that as a spearhead of defense 
rather than upon the legions of General de Lattre. 
To do this apart 
from and in defiance of innately nationalistic aims spells foredoomed 
failure." The trip gave Kennedy both a ne.r sympathy for the problems 
of Asia and a ne., understanding of the power of nationalism in the 
underdeveloped 'lOrld. 
t 
c-24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt from The Bitter Heritage ; 1967, by Arthur M. Schlesinger 
Pages 75-76 
..• The tyro heaviest blows recently suffered. by Peking -- the d.estruction 
of the Communist Party in Indonesia and. the declaration of independ.ence by 
North Korea -- took place without benefit of American patronage or rhetoric. 
Ind.eed., too overt American intervention may actually have the effect of 
smothering the forces of local nationalism or driving them to the other 
sid.e and. thereby ultimately weakening the containment of China. 
In the unpredictable decades ahead, the most effective bulwark against 
an aggressive national communist state in some circumstances may well be 
national communism in surrounding states . 
A rational policy of containing 
China could. have recognized. that a communist Vietnam under Ho might be a 
better instrument of containment than a shaky Saigon regime led. by right-
wing mandarins or air force generals. 
Had. Ho taken over all Vietnam in 
1954, he might today be soliciting Soviet support to strengthen his re-
sistance to Chinese pressure, and. this situation, however appalling for 
the people of South Vietnam, would. obviously be better for the United. States 
than the one in which we are floundering today. 
And. nOiv, alas, it may be 
almost too late : 
the whole thrust of United. States policy since 1954, 
and. more than ever since the bombing of the north began, has been not to 
pry Peking and. Hanoi apart but to drive them together. 
C-25 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt from Viet-Nam Witness 1953-1966 by Bernard. B. Fall 
July 1965 - pages 119-120 
It is vital to r emember that, unlike any other successful communist 
movement, the Vietnamese party fought its way to ruling po,ver in virtual 
i solation . 
In Eastern Europe, Soviet troops were alvlays present in the 
countries where communi st takeovers took place; in fact , they were an es-
sential ingredient. 
In China , the turnover t o the communists of vast stores 
of Japanese arms by the Soviet Forces in Manchuria was of vital importance 
to the CCPs military success , and. the Russian military presence in North 
Korea ensured. the creation of a "people ' s d.emocracy" there. 
In Albania, 
Ti to's partisans played. the role of Soviet troops elsevlhere. 
In the Viet-
Nam of 19~·5 , on t he contrary, the D.R. V.N. had. no such support from either 
the Soviets or even the Chinese Communi sts (then bottled.-up in the hills 
of northwest ern China); and. connections with the French CP, then just 
emerging from four years of clandestinity, were probably nonexistent for 
the simple r eason that the first postwar ships t o go from France to I ndo-
china only r eached, Saigon in late September 1945 -- and, these were troop 
t ransports bringing the vanguard. of the French Expeditionary Force. 
In 
other vlord.s , the Vietnamese Communists literally had. to play their revO-
lution alone and, by ear . 
c-26 
TOP SECF~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt from Toward. Peace in Indochina , 1966, by Anthony Ed.en, Earl of Avon 
Pages 22-24 
If Peking is obsessed. by its vTrongful impression of American intentions, 
Hanoi's opinion may eventually prove l ess decid.ed. 
Moscow's judgment has 
influence in North Vietnam vThich can at times balance Peking's. If China's 
support is the tougher and. more resolutely proclaimed., a number of Hanoi's 
communist lead.ers are Moscow trained, includj.ng Ho Chi Minh himself. 
More-
over, historic instincts can be strong, however Left the lead.ers. 
The 
Vietnamese might .not relish a fate which could. relegate them to serve as 
China ' s southernmost imperial outpost, even for a time. 
There are risks also for North Vietnam in the growing Sino-Soviet 
bitterness. 
Recently the Chinese Government have even ignored. all anniver-
saries of friendship with their Vietnam campaign a cause of complaint against 
Russia, while dawdling Soviet supplies on their journey . 
That is not cozy 
for Hanoi, which has no wish to quarrel with either communist great power 
but COUld. find. the extreme Chinese d.emands increasingly prickly to live 
with. 
The parallel which is sometimes drawn beh7een Marshal Ti to and. MoscovT 
and. Ho Chi Minh and. Peking is not, hOI'lever, close. 
North Vietnam is at 
war and. in no position to quarrel with its chief provid.er of arms and. sup-
plies. 
Even in less arduous conditions, China would. still be the big neigh-
bor, as well as the big brother , and. difficult to d.efy, if such' a thing 
could. be even dreamed. of. All the same there is more SCope for eventual 
agreement with Hanoi than with Peking, d.espite the tragic trail of blood. 
and suffering, or maybe because of it , 
It is Vietnam, not China, which has had. the losses in life -and. in 
wealth, from schools to communications. 
Some day, somehow this has to ertd. 
Moreover, even the North has much to gain from forming part of a girdle 
of neutral states, or at least from seeing such a girdle formed. to the 
south and. southv7est of its territory. 
For this to be pOSSible, Hanoi must 
accept t wo glimpses of reality, though they need. never be publicly pro-
claimed.. 
The first is that the United. States cannot be beaten, the second. 
is that while a United. States military withdraliral might find. its place in 
a phased. timetable within an agreement, there is not a remote chance of 
even a partial American withdraliral unless North Vietnam plays its part, 
although a negative one, to make this possible. 
C-27 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt fr om The Arrogance of Po>ver , 1966, by Senator J. William Fulbright 
Pages 111-114 
At the heart of the Vietnam tragedy is the fact that the most 
powerful nationalist movement in that country is one which is also com-
munist. 
Ho Chi Minh is not a mere agent of Communist China, much less 
of the lIinternational communist conspiracyll that we used. to hear so much 
about. 
He is a bona-fide nationalist r evolutionary, the leader of his 
country's rebellion against French colonialism. 
He is also a communist, 
and. that is the e.ssential reason why since at least 1950 he has been re-
gard.ed. as an enemy by the United. States. 
This outline, highly abbreviated. though it is, illustrates a most 
important fact -- the merger of nationalism and. communism in Vietnam under 
the leadership of Ho Chi Minh. It is not meaningful to speak of the Viet 
Minh as more nationalist than communist or as more COIDrrlunist than national-
ist; it i s both . 
The merger is a misfortune from the vieYTpoint of American 
interests and. preferences, but it is also a fact, a fact yli th which we 
can and. should. come to terms . 
Even today, after all that America has d.one 
to sustain the South Vietnamese government, there is only one politician 
whose name is kno,m to peasants allover Vietnam: 
Ho Chi Minh. 
It is i mportant to be very clear about what is meant by IInationalism." 
It has been best d.escribed. by Hans Kohn as a "state of mind.
1I which regard.s 
the nation as "the ideal form of political organization and. the nationality 
as the source of all creative cultural energy and. of economic well being." 
Understood in this way, nationalism is not necessarily humane or democratic, 
socially constructive or responsive to ind.ividual need.s. It is merely 
powerful -- powerful in a sense of being able to mobilize the loyalty an~ 
active support of vast numbers of ordinary people. 
When one describes 
Ho Chi Minh or the Viet Minh or the Viet Cong o.s "nationalist," it is not 
to be inferred. that they are regarded. as saints. 
Far from it: 
they have 
demonstrated. again and again that they are fanatical and. cruel, but they 
have also shown that they are patriots, that they have identified. them-
selves with the nation and. its mystique, with that "state of mind." which 
more than any other in our time inspires ordinary people to acts of loyalty, 
bravery, and. self":'sacrifice. 
For our purposes, the significance of Ho Chi Minh's nationalism is 
that it is associated. with what Bernard. Fall has called. "the 2,000-year-
old. distrust in Vietnam of everything Chinese." 
Vietnamese communism is 
therefore a potential bulwark -- perhaps the only potential bulwark --
against Chinese d.omination of Vietnam. It is for this reason that I be-
lieve that we should. try, if it is not yet too late, to come to terms with 
North Vietnam and. the Viet Congo 
c-28 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Excerpt from "What Choices Do We Have in Vietnam?" by Edwin O. Reischauer 
Look, September 19, 1967, page 27 
The obvious alternative was to allow Ho and. his Communist-d.ominated. 
Vietminh to take over the whole of Vietnam. 
This would have happened. early 
if the United. States had. made quite clear in 1945 that it d.id. not approve 
of the r evival of colonialism in Asia and. would give it no support. It 
would. still have happened. if we had. not given massive aid. to the French 
war effort after 1949. It would. have happened. if we had been willing in 
1954 to support the Geneva agreements and. had. not tried. to build. up a per-
manent regime und.er Diem in South Vietnam. It would. have happened. if we 
had. not stead.ily increased. our military commitments to South Vietnam between 
1960 and. 1963. It would. have happened. if we had d.ecided. against massive 
participation in the war in the ivinter of 1961.f- '65. 
Thus, under each of 
our last four Presidents, decisions were clearly made, even if not fully 
thought out, to reject this one obvious alternative. 
What would. have happened. if, at any of these moments of decision, 
we had. chosen the alternative? If vTe had. clearly favored Vietnamese 
nationalism over French colonialism in 1945, it seems obvious that Ho, 
in short order, would. have established. effective control over the whole 
of Vietnam. 
He probably would. have set up the same sort of dictatorial, 
oppressive, Communist rule over all Vietnam that he actually d.id. over the 
North. 
He would. probably have encountered. much the same sort of problems 
he did. in the North, and. the economic progress of Vietnam vTould. have been 
slow, though, of course, not as slow as in a war-torn land .. 
The society and. government of this unified. Vietnam would probably 
not have been something we would. have approved. of, but vle have not fou...nd. 
much we could. approve of in the society and. government of a divided. Viet-
nam either. 
Q,uite possibly, a unified. Vietnam und.er Ho, spared. the ravages 
of war, would. have gone at least as far tovlard. the evolution of a stable 
and. reasonably just society as has the d.ivided., ivar-torn land. we knO'H today. 
For us, hO'Hever , the question is what that sort of Vietnam WOUld. have meant 
in international politics. 
I believe it would. be safe to assume that it 
would. have been a highly nationalistic Vietnam. 
By the same token, I be-
lieve it also would. have been free of Chinese d.omination. 
The Vietnamese 
have instinctive fears of their great northern neighbor. 
While they have 
al'Hays admired. and. imitated. China, for more than a millennium they have 
( 
had. a deep Inational tradition of resistance to its domination. If they 
had. had. no specific r eason to fear or resent us, the chances are that their 
fears and. resentments would. have come to focus on China , ivhether or not 
I 
• t 
it, too, were Communls . 
It seJms highly probable that Ho's Communi s t-d.ominated. regime, if it 
had. been allowed. by us to take over all Vietnam at the end. of the war, would. 
have moved. to a position with relation to China not unlike that of Tito's 
C-29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Yugoslavia toward. the Soviet Union. 
Ho, like Tito, had. had. cordial wartime 
relations with us. 
He apparently expected our continued. friendship and. had. 
more to hope for in economic aid, from us than China. 
He and. his associates 
were ardent nationalists and. probably had, deeper fears and. suspicions of 
the Chinese than the Yugoslavs had of the Russians. 
While such a Vietnam 
might have been more circumspect and. respectful toward. China than Tito has 
been toward. the Soviet Union, it would probably have been even more fiercely 
independent. 
The way in which Hanoi has sought to maintain its independence 
of Peking and. Moscow, despite the military dependence on both, which was 
forced. on it by the protracted. war with us, suggests how strongly independent 
a Communist Vietnam would. have been, if not pushed, by these military necessi-
ties. 
Would. such a Communist regime in all Vietnam have been a serious menace 
to its neighbors or to world. peace? 
I doubt it. A Communist take-over 
in all Vietnam shortly after the end. of the war would. probably have seemed. 
to the rest of the world. no more of a Com~unist triumph than the successive 
victories of Communists over anti-Communists that have taken place in Viet-
nam since 1945. It is hard. to believe that a united. Communist Vietnam WOUld. 
have had, any more harmful an influence on Laos than a d.ivid.ed. war-torn 
Vietnam has had,. 
Laos and. Cambodia might have fallen under Vietnamese in-
fluence , but this at least would. have kept them out of Chinese control . 
Or, possibly, Cambodia's traditional animosity toward. Vietnam would, have 
induced it to veer further away than it has from association with the Com-
munist nations, if South Vietnam, too, had been Communist. 
Thailand. WOUld. 
probably have been l ess adversely affected by an entirely Communist Vietnam 
tpan it has been by the prolonged. war there. 
Meanwhile, a united., strongly 
nationalistic Vietn~, while paying lip service to Communist China, would. 
probably have served, as a far more effective dike against the south-I.rard. 
extension of Chinese power and. influence than have a North Vietnam forced 
into military d.epend.ence on China and. an unstable South Vietnam. 
And, this 
general situation in Vietnam and, Southeast Asia, which would. have been so 
much less unsatisfactory for us than what we have today, vTOuld, have been 
achieved, without any of the terrible costs that have mounted, so high. 
I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-30 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I.C .2 
1. C. 2. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A POLITicAL BIOGRAPHY OF 
HO CHI MINH, 1890-1950 
TABLE OF CONTENTS and OUTLINE 
1. 
Forming t he Political Man . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
C- 32 
2. 
Comi ntern Agent. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 
c- 35 
3. 
Prison and Obscurity.... . ............... . ...................... 
C- 36 
4.. 
Wartime Leader .. .. .......................................................................................... .. . 
c-38 
5.. 
Head of state .... .. .. .. ................................................................ .. .................. " " .. 
c-38 
6. 
Ho , Again the Nationalist ......... . ...................... . ..... 
C-40 
7. 
U. S. Percepti ons of Ho .. . ......................... . .••...•..... 
C-41 
8: 
Ho , As i an Neutral ? • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . • • . • • • . • • • • . • • • • • . • • • • • . • • • • • . 
c-46 
9.. 
Ho, Realist " .... " ...... "" .. " ...... "" .. """ ........ """ .. " .......... " ...... "" .. ,, .... ,,.. .. .......... 
C-47 
10. 
Ho Chi Minh Chronol ogy.......... . ...... . . • . . . • . . . • . • . . . . . • • . . . . 
C-48 
. I 
I 
C-31 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I. C. 2. 
A POLITICAL BIOGRAPHY OF HO CHI MINH, 1890-1950 
1'here have been ti'lO periods in the life of Ho Chi Minh, President 
of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV), in which he ostensibly devoted 
himself vTholly to Vietnamese Nationalism. 
The first period was in the 
early years before 1920 when Ho Chi Minh was an avid anti-colonialist, 
but not yet caught up in the communist revolution. 
The second period of 
seeming nationalist preoccupation was from 1945 to 1950, when Ho tried to 
negotiate with the French, appealed to the U.S., UK and China for inter-
vention in Vietnam, denied being a communist, and avoided any ostensible 
link between the DRV and the Kremlin. 
The remainder of Ho Chi Minh's 
political life has been that of a classic communist, anti-colonial, 
nationalist revolutionary -- exile, Moscow schools, prison, covert opera-
tions, guerrilla warfare, party politics. 
A chronology of his career 
through 1950 is attached, (pp. c-48 ff). 
1. 
Forming the Political Man 
Ho Chi Minh was born Nguyen Van Thalli1, 19 May 1890, in Kim-Lien 
in the northern Annam province of Nghe-An (in what is now North Vietnam). 
Ho was exposed early in life to bitter resentment of the French presence 
in Vietnam; his father was jailed at Pouio Condore for participation in 
nationalist activities. 
Ho's secondary education took place in a hotbed of 
nationalism, Hue's Lycee Quoc-Hoc. 
His schooling terminated around 1910 
before he received a diploma, but still he acquired more education than 
most of his compatriots. 
His decision to work as a mess boy on a French 
liner in 1912 has been regarded by Bernard Fall as a key political deci-
sion -- that is, Fall held that Ho, unlike most conservative fellovl 
Nationalists, thereby opted for the West (republicanism, democracy, popu-
lar sovereignty, etc .), against the East (militarism, mandarinal society, 
etc.). II 
If the going to sea were a significant decision at all, it 
probably showed only that Ho was not inclined to follow the normal path 
of Vietnamese nationalism. 
This fact was borne out by Ho's break with 
his father, Nguyen Tat Sac, who had given him a letter for Phan Chu Trinh, 
a veteran Viet nationalist" in Paris. 
Sac had hoped Phan would tutor 
Ho in Vietnamese nationalis , but Ho could not acce'pt Phan' s 
~'peaceful 
cooperation with the French," and left Paris; thereafter he severed his 
ties with his father. ~ 
As a young Asian struggling to earn a living in pre-World War I 
Europe and America, Ho had been exposed to the racial inequalities of the 
Western civilization and perhaps sought security when he joined the Chinese-· 
dominated Overseas Workers Association, a clandestine, anti-colonialist 
organization concerned with improving the working conditions of foreign 
laborers but increasingly a political force. 
Ho went to France from London 
in 1917 with the war in the forefront, and the Russian Leninist revolution 
in the background. 
Looking on himself as a political organizer and writer 
of sorts, Ho signed his articles Nguyen Ai Quoc (which means IINguyen-the-
Patriot") -- an alias by which all Vietnam came to know him until be became 
C-32 
TOP SECRET -
Sensitiv~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ho Chi Minh in 1943. 
As a Paris writer, anti-colonialist nationalism was 
the major theme for his back room neivspaper -- Viet Nam Hon (The Soul of 
Vietnam). 
Ho also produced a widely-read attack on French colonial policy 
called French Colonization on Trial, which purportedly became the "bible 
of nationalists" in Vietnam. jJ 
Caught up in the patriotic fervor of the 
armistice, Ho produced an eight-point program to present at Versailles: 
"Attracted by the promise of v.loodrow Wilson's Fourteen 
Points, spokesmen of the various peoples who wanted independence 
followed the l eaders of the victorious Allies to Paris in 1919. 
Along with the Indians , the Koreans, the Irish, and the Arabs, 
Ho Chi Minh came 'vi th a list of Vietnamese grievances and a plea 
for Vietnamese autonomy. 
He arrived at Versailles in rented 
evening clothes to deliver his appeal. 
But the statesmen assem-
bled in Paris had no time for the problems of the subject peoples 
of the French Empire, and nothing came of it." !!.I 
This was Ho's last major fling at non-communist nationalism before 
1920, since increasingly he began to move in the circles of Leon Blum, 
Marcel Cochin, Marius Moutet, and other left-wing political figures, and 
became a member of the French Socialist Party. In May, 1920, Ho was a 
delegate at the Socialist Congress in Tours, and joined in the founding 
of the French Communist Party. 
Ho much later in life recalled those days 
in describing "The Path Which Led Me To Leninism. "-)E-
"After World War I, I made my living in Paris, nOvT as a 
retoucher at a photographer ' s, now as painter of 'Chinese antiq,ui-
ties' (made in France!). 
I '",ould distribute leaflets denouncing 
the crimes com~itted by the French colonialists in Viet-Nam . 
"At that time, I supported the October Revolution only 
instinctively, not yet grasping all its historic importance. 
I loved and admired Lenin because he ,vas a great patriot vlho 
liberated his compatriots; until then, I had read none of his 
books . 
"The reason for my joining the French Socialist Party was 
that these 'ladies and gentlemen' -- as I called my corru~ades 
at that moment -- had shown their sympathy toward me, toward 
the struggle of the oppressed peoples. 
But I understood neither 
what vlaS a party, a trade-union, nor what was Socialism or Com-
munism. 
"Heated discussions "Tere then taking place in the branches 
of the Socialist Party, about the q,uestion of whether the Socialist 
Party should remain in the Second International, should a Second-
and-a-half International be founded, or should the Socialist 
Party join Lenin's Third International? 
I attended the meetings 
regularly, t'vice or thrice a ''leek, and attentively listened to 
the discussions. First, I could not understand thoroughly. 
t 
*Article written in April, 1960, for the So.viet review Problems of the East, 
for the 90th anniversary of Lenin's birth. 
From Fall, Ho on Revolution, 5-7· 
C-33 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Why were the discussions so heated? 
Either with the Second, 
Second-and-a-half, or Third International, the revolution could 
be waged. 
What was the use of arguing then? 
As for the First 
International, what had become of it? 
"What I wanted most to know -- and this precisely \vas not 
debated in the meetings -- was: 
Which Internati onal sides with 
the peoples of colonial countries? 
"I raised this question -- the most important in my opinion 
in a meeting. 
Some comrades answered: It is the Third, not the 
Second, International . 
And a comrade gave me Lenin's 'Thesis 
on the National and Colonial Questions,' pUblished by l'Humanite, 
to r ead . 
"There were political terms difficult to understand in this 
thesis . 
But by dint of reading it again and again, finally I 
could grasp the main part of it. What emotion, enthusiasm, clear-
sightedness , and confidence it i nstilled i nto me ! 
I was over-
joyed to t ears . 
Though sitting al one in my room, I shouted aloud 
a s if addressing large crowds : 
'Dear martyrs , compatriots! 
This 
is what we need, this is the path to our liberation!' 
"After then, I had entire confidence i n Lenin, in the Third 
International . 
"Formerly, duri ng the meetings of the Party branch, I only 
listened to the discussion; I had a vague belief that all \vere 
logical, and could not differentiate as to who were right and 
who were wrong. 
But from then on, I al so plunged into the debates 
and discussed with fervor. 
'Ihough I vTaS still l acking French 
words to eA~ress all my thoughts, I smashed the allegations attack-
ing Lenin and the Third International with no l ess vigor. 
My 
only argument was : 
'If you do not condemn col onialism, i f you 
do not side with the colonial people, what kind of r evolution 
are. you waging?' 
"Not only did I take part in the meet i ngs of my own Party 
branch, but I also went to other Party branches to l ay dovm 'my 
position.' 
Now I must t ell again that Comrades Marcel Cachin, 
Vaillant Couturier, Monmousseau, and many others helped me to 
broaden my knmvledge. 
Finally, at the Tours Congress , I voted 
with them for our joining the Third International. 
"At first, 
patriotism, not yet Communism, l ed me to have 
confidence i n Lenin, in the Third International. Step by step, 
along the struggle, by studying Marxism-Leninism parall el with 
participation in practical activities, I gradually came upon 
the fact that only Socialism and Communism can liberate t he 
oppressed nations and the working peo'ple throughout the world 
from slavery. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"There is a legend, in our country as well as in China , on 
the miraculous 'Book of the Wise.' 
When facing great difficulties, 
one opens it and finds a way out. 
Leninism is not only a miracu-
lous 'book of the wise,' a compass for us Vietnamese revolutionaries 
and people: it i s also the radiant sun illuminating our path to 
final victory, to Socialism and Communism." 
2. 
Comintern Agent 
Later in 1920 Ho Chi Minh also attended the Baku Conference (First 
Conference of the Peoples of the Far East) on his first visit to Russia. 
It is a1.so likely that he took part in the Conference of Workers of the 
Far East in 1922 in Moscow which was concerned with establishing communism 
in the Far East. 
He returned to France and 
"Ho Chi Mi!1..h stayed on in France until 1923, when the French 
Communist Party chose him as its delegate to the Congress of the 
Peasant International (the Krestintern) which met in Moscow 
that October ... he did not leave the Soviet Union after the meet-
ing, but remained there for more than a year, studying Communism, 
its techniques, and its organization, first-hand. 
He came to 
know many of Communism's great and near-great during this period, 
as before he had come to know the leaders of the Left-Wing move-
ment in Paris. II 2.1 
In 1924, Ho became a student at the Eastern vlorkers University and studied 
Marxism-Leninism and bolshevik tactics. 21 
In 1925, he accompanied Michael Borodin, the Comintern delegate to the 
Kuomintang to Canton, China, as a Chinese translator to the Soviet consu-
late . 
After a 
fe~" months, Ho had organized the Association of Vietnamese 
Revolutionary Young Comrades. 11 
The Whampoa Political and Military 
Academy in Canton, which had attracted revolutionaries, especially Viet-
namese , was the center of Ho's training program of revolution and Marxis~. 
Ho is alleged to have displayed political ruthlessness in exposing a rival 
nationalist, Pham Boi Chau, a renowned Vietnamese patriot and idealist; 
Ho is supposed to have r eceived 100,000 piasters from the security police 
for his betrayal. 
Ho also set up a personnel security system which reputedly 
impaired other Vietnamese nationalist organizations. 
He and his assistant, 
one Lam Duc Thu, required two photographs of each incoming recruit to 
Whampoa Academy .. Upon graduation, if the stUdent had joined Ho's Youth 
League, he returned to Vietnam in secrecy. If the stUdent displayed inter-
est in other parties, Thu sold his photograph to the French consulate, 
which would then have the stUdent arrested at the border. 
Thus Ho 
strengthened his own secret cells, while weakening his nationalist opposi-
tion. §} 
At Whampoa in 1926 Ho wrote that "only a communist party can 
[ultimateliJ insure the well-being of Annam." 21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-35 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In 1927, Chiang Kai-shek broke with the communists , and Borodin was 
forced to return to Moscow . . Ho Chj~ Minh returned to Moscow with him, 
but before departing turned over l eadership of the Youth League to a 
trusted assistant who was arrested within the year. 
The League leader-
ship then fell to Thu, "Tho was still Jiving sumptiously in Hong Kong on 
French blood money. 
Thu called a congress in Hong Kong in 1929 which 
resulted in the Vietnam delegates walking out in disgust , and forming an 
Indochinese Communist Party (ICP) in Tonkin. 
The emigre leadership of 
the League conceded the necessity of organizing a communist party, but in 
reality, was unwilling to deviate from the political line set by Ho Chi 
Minh -- which was to build a revolutionary nationalist party with socialist 
tendencies. ~ As the ICP grew in strength, the Youth League adopted 
the name "Annamese Communist Party." 
After leaving China in 1927, Ho Chi Minh travelled to Moscow, Berlin, 
and in 1929 was in Thailand working secretly with 30,000 Viet emigres. 
Ho returned to Hong Kong in January, 1930, and r esolved the disunity among 
the several Indochinese Commlmist factions . . A ne"T party was set up, with 
a central committee at Haiphong, named the Vietnam Communist Party. 
In 
October, 1930, at Comintern insistence , it was r enamed the Indochinese 
Communist Party, to include Cambodian and Laotians; the Central Committee 
was transferred to Saigon. 11/ 
French police r epression of communists 
shortly after nearly destroyed the organization; a number of Ho's lieutenants, 
Pham van Dong, Giap and others, were sent to Poulo Candou for long prison 
terms . 
3. 
Prison and Obscurity 
Ho, who had been sentenced to death in absentia by the French, 
was arrested in Hong Kong in 1931 by the British. 
Bernard Fall "Trote 
this account: 
"Legality, hOvlever, prevailed in the genteel ,.lOrld of Hong 
Kong's Anglo-Saxon law. 
Defended by Sir Stafford Cripps before 
Britain's Privy Court, Ho was found not subject to extradition 
since he 'vas a political refugee . 
Still, the British did not 
want him and he ,.;as a marked man. 
He slipped out of Hong Kong, 
into the nearby but isolated Chinese province of Fukien. 
"Somehow, only a year later, Ho was in Shanghai, the only 
foreign place in Asia then where a substantial Vietnamese com-
munity could.be found. 
He was desperately seeking contact with 
the Comintern apparatus, which was now prudently concealing its 
operations in China. It was understandable that what was left 
of the Chinese Communist Party outside of Mao's forces was not 
about to advertise its presence allover Shanghai. 
But there 
may have been another reason as well for Ho's difficulties in 
making contact with the Communists: 
Ho had been released from 
British prison for reasons which a suspicious Communist-might 
find difficult to swallow. 
To a Communist apparatus emerging 
from the blows it had been subjected toln the early Thirties, 
it was normal procedure to isolate Ho Chi Minh as a potential 
C-36 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
agent provocateur until more was known about what he had said and 
done while in British custody. 
"Finally, Ho made contact and early in 1934 the Communist . 
apparatus smuggled him back to Moscow, where he had been preceded 
by a fairly large group of Vietnamese trainees studying in many 
fields , from engineering to plain agitprop (agitation and propa-
ganda). 
He naturally turned to the l atter . 
"Ho first attended the Institute for National and Colonial 
Q.uestions in Moscow, and then the famous 'graduate school' for 
senior Communist leaders, the Lenin School. 
Moscow, in 1935-38, 
also provided an education of a far different sort: 
the Stalin 
purges. It would be interesting to know what Ho's feelings were 
as he saw some of his best friends accused, convicted, and executed 
for crimes which they patently had not committed. 
What is remarka-
ble is that Ho, as a well-known member of the Comintern group, 
was not purged right along with them, for hundreds of thousands 
of people of lesser distinction than he became victims of Stalin's 
mania." "E./ 
The record of Ho's travels in the period of 1933-1939 is otherwise obscure; 
the commun~t movement in Vietnam was led by Tran Van Giau and others dur-
ing those years. 
Ho emerged from his retreats in 1939, a difficult year. 
Ho, as a 
disciplined communist had to follow the Party's tactical guidance, which 
was intended to safeguard the Soviet Union as the base of the international 
movement, even when this brought him into temporary conflict with his long 
term goals for Vietnam. 
Of the period just preceding World War II, Fall 
has written: 
" 
I 
... Ho probably was then unconditionally loyal to Stalin, 
and Stalin knew it. 
This became particularly clear when Nazism 
began to loom as a threat and the Communist parties decided in 
1936 to; apply the policy of 'popular fronts' with the Western 
democracies. 
"This policy was a bitter pill for the colonial Communist 
governments such as that of Indochina, for it meant giving up 
advocacy of outright independence in favor of a policy of coopera-
tion w~th the French colonial regime . 
But Ho, returning to Com-
munist rases i n Northwest China in 1937, gritted his teeth and 
rammed this line dOlm the throat of his reluctant following in 
its most minute vagaries, and his report on the results, addressed 
to the Comintent in 1939, demonstrated his success. 
I 
"lit was probably Ho' s lowest point. 
He had to forsl<[ear 
. publicly all he had stood for, had to cooperate with the French, 
the people he hated most , and had to sellout the Trotskyist 
TOP SECRET' - Sensitive 
C-37 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
allies who had helped the Communists from time to time in beating 
French-sponsored candidates for elections in CochinChina (a French 
colony, then part of the Federation of Indochina which, as a 
protectorate, enjoyed a measure of legislative representation). 
And the worst was not yet over. 
Not authorized by the Comintern 
to expose himself through a premature return to Vietnam, he now 
worked only as a low-level communications operator to the Chinese 
Communist 8th Route Army, then fighting the Japanese." W 
4. 
v.Tartime Leader 
In 1940 Bo was reported in Liuchow, Kwang-Si Province, South China, 
engaged in training guerrillas under the sponsorship of the local warlord. 
Shortly thereafter Ho, with the remnants of the central committee of the 
·ICP, crossed into Vietnam, and in 1941 began organizing a resistance move-
ment on a large scale . 
The ICP prepared for, and advocated, armed insurrey-
tion against French Imperialism and Japanese Fascism. 
However, Ho Chi Minh 
organized the Viet Minh as a Vietnamese nationalist movement of resistance. 
The Viet Minh program centered on collaboration with the Allies to defeat 
Japan and liberate Indochina. 
In the course of his work, Ho was arrested 
in May 1942 by Chinese nationalists, under mysterious circumstances, and 
in June 1943 was as mysteriously released. 
Ho re-joined tle Viet Minh, 
re-entered Vietnam, and led the Viet Minh to power in August, 1945. 
Ho, at the time he became President of the DRV, was undoubtedly 
a communist in the sense that he had spent twenty-five years in the embrace 
of Party discipline and doctrine, and that he had been an agent of the 
Communist International. 
He was also a dedicated revolutionary nationalist 
whose cause had exacted of him years of hardship, imprisonment, exile, and 
conspiratorial isolation. In his Notes from a Prison Diary, he "Trote: 
"People who come out of prison can build up a country. 
Misfortune i s a test of people's fidelity. 
t 
Those who protest at injustice are people of true merit. 
When the prison doors are opened, the r eal dragon will fly out." W 
5. 
Head of State 
Whatever else he was, Ho was a l eader and organizer par excellence, 
an astute manipulator of men who had successfully threaded a way through 
the tangle of international intrigue in China to political power for himself 
and his followers of the ICP and the Viet Minh. 
He came to power in North 
Vietnam under the aegis of the Allies, and by popular acclaim. 
He did 
not establish a communist government, although besides hjmself in the Presi-
dency, he had arranged that communist lieutenants would hold the portfolios 
of interior, national def'ense, finance, propaganda, education, and youth. 
The communists , although thus centrally placed, were in a minority, and 
full account had been taken of independents and several of the principal 
C-38 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
non-communist nationalist parti~s in determining representation on the 
cabinet. '}!2j 
In November, 1945, Ho disestablished the Indochinese Communist Party; 
and Association for Marxist Studies was formed when the ICP was abolished, 
but it was not until 1951 that the Communist Party again asserted itself 
openly in DRV politics. ~ Ho ostensibly threw his entire energies into 
the Viet Minh, which he described in 1945 as having: 
. 
" ••. millions of members from all social strata: 
intellec-
tuals, peasants, workers, businessmen, soldiers, and from all 
nationalities in the country ... " l7j 
Subsequently, he moved to cut down the number of communists in cabinet 
posts within the government, and otherwise to enhance its coalition nature. 
Ho, the Viet Minh, and the DRV government stressed their identity 
with the people, and their patriotic, democratic and nationalist goals, 
foregoing communist cant. 
Ho's own writings of the period are to point: '}j}j 
"October, 1945: 
We must realize that all Government organs, 
from the Central to the Communal level, are the people's servants, 
that is to say they are appointed to work for the sake of the 
whole peoples interests. 
"October, 1945: 
We neither dislike nor hate the French 
people . 
On the contrary, we respect them as a great people 
who were first to propagate the lofty ideals of liberty, equality, 
and fraternity. 
"November, 191.~5: 
The colonialists ... have run counter to 
the promises concerning democracy and liberty that the Allied 
powers have proclaimed. 
They have of their own accord sabotaged 
their fathers' principles of liberty and equality. 
In consequence , 
it is for a just cause, for justice of the .. ,orld, and for Vietnam's 
land and people that our compatriots throughout the country have 
risen to struggle, and are firmly determined to maintain their 
independence . 
"January, 1946: 
With a view to winning complete independence 
and bringing about a close cooperation between the various politi-
cal parties to further strengthen the Government , it is nO .. l named 
the Provisional Coalition Government. 
At this moment, if all 
parties unite together, the Government can overcome difficulties. 
Political Objectives : 
To carry out satisfactorily the 
elections ... to unify the various administrative organs 
according to democratic principles. 
Economic Objectives: 
To endeavor to develop agriculture; 
to encourage cultivation and stock breeding in order to 
check famine. 
C-39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Military Obj ectives: 
To unify the various armed forces •.• 
"October 1946: 
We must show to the French Government and 
people and to the world at large that the Vietnamese people are 
already in possession of all the required conditions to be inde-
pendent and free, and that recognition of Our freedom and i nde -
pendence i s a necessity •.. 
"December 1946: 
compatriots ! 
Rise up! 
Men and women, 
old and young, regardless of creeds, political parties, or 
nationalities, all the Vietnamese must st and up to fight the 
French colonialists t o save the Fatherland ..• 
IIApril 1948: 
The nation has its roots in the people. 
In 
the Resistance War ·and national r econstructi on, the main force 
lies in the people .•. 
11 
6. 
Ho, Again the Nationalist 
The sincerity of Ho's nationalism, then and since, seems as 
beyond question as that of Stalin, or Harry Truman. 
Among his countrymen, 
Ho was preeminent among all nationalists . 
Ho had l ed the forces which 
welcomed the Allies as they entered Indochina to accept the surrender of 
Japanese forces there; Ho headed the DRV in 1945-1946 when national unity, 
independence, and peace seemed close at hand. 
Ho was popular, respected, 
even revered. 
He cultivated an i mage calculated to appeal to the peasant : 
venerable age , rustic austerity, and humility. 
He i nsisted on IIUncl e Ho" 
in introducing hims elf, and i t vTaS an "Uncle Ho II that the countrys ide came 
to r egard him. 
No other Vietnamese was so widely known, or so universally 
r espected . ~ Moreover, unlike any of hi s competitors , he had at his 
service a disciplined political organization of national scope, trained in 
the arts of revolution, and skilled i n the techniques of mobilizing opinion 
and stimulating political action . 
In truth, t hen, Ho was, to the extent 
that such existed in 1945 or 1946, the embodi ment of Vietnamese national-
ism. 5:9J 
I 
The historical problem, of course , is t o vThat extent Ho' s na tional-
ist goal s might have modified his communist convictions. 
To many observers 
of the da.y" Ho seemed to place the former above the latter not solely as a 
matter of dissembl ance , as he might ·have done in the simultaneous dissolu-
tion of the, Barty and the formation of the Marxist Associati on, but as 
a result o~ d eepl~ held doubts about t he validity of communism as a politi-
cal form suitable for Vietnam. 
Sainteny who negotiated the 6 March 1946 
Accord with Ho for France wrote that: 
"His proposals, his actions, his 
attitude , his r ea.l or assumed personality, all t ended to convince that he 
found a solution by force r epugnant ... " 
Bao Dai is r eputed to have said 
that: 
"I saw Ho Chi Minh suffer. 
He was fighting a battle within himself. 
Ho had his lown struggle. 
He r ealized commlmism was not best for his coun-
try, but it was too late . 
Ultimately, he could not overcome his allegiance 
to communism."?JJ 
During the negotiations for a modus vivendi with the 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
c-40 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
French in Paris in autumn, 1946, Ho appealed to the French to "save him 
from the extremists" vrithin the Viet Minh by some meaningful concession 
to Vietnamese independence. ~ In reply to a journalist' s inquiry, 
Ho claimed that he could remain neutral, "like Switzerland" in the 
developing world power struggle between communism and the West. 23/ 
7. 
U.S. Perceptions of Ho 
Personally, Ho was charming, and he was especially captivating 
with Americans. 
Ho' s public statements resonated vTell 'with the anti-
colonial sentiments of most Americans, and he presented an appeali ng 
figure, fragile, humble, ascetic, yet humorous and cosmopolitan. 24/ 
General Gallagher, who was the senior U.S. officer in contact wit~Ho 
in 1945, was impressed with Ho's resoluteness and nationalist dedication. 
Upon his return, he told State Department officials that "Ho was '\villing 
to cooperate with Great Britain, USSR, or the United States and ,,[ould 
perhaps even settle for French tutelage if that were subordinated to 
control by other nations." 
"Asked how 
I com..rnunist' the Viet Minh were, General 
Gallagher replied that they were smart and successfully 
gave the impression of not being communist. 
Rather, they 
emphasized their interest in independence and their 
interest in independence and their Annamese patriotism. 
Their excellent organization and propaganda t echniques , 
General Gallagher pointed out, would seem to have the 
earmarks of some Russian influence . 
General Gallagher 
stated that the minority Cao Dai group were definitely 
Communist . 
In his opinion, hmvever, the Viet Minh should 
not be labeled full-fledged doctrinaire communist." * 
On 11 September, 1946, the U.S. Ambassador in Paris reported a visit 
from Ho: 
* From Memorandum of Convers'ation, by Mr. Richard L. Sharp, of the 
Division of Southeast Affairs, Department of State, dated Janu-
ary 30, 1946. 
t 
C-41 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive ' 
"I have the honor to report that at his request, I re-
ceived a visit this morning from M. Ho Chi-minh, 'President 
of the Republic of Viet-Nam ' , who confirmed the news pub-
lished in the local press that the Fontainebleau negotiations 
between the Viet-Nam representatives and the French repre-
sentatives have practically broken down and the Viet-Nam 
delegation will be returning to Indochina ... dthin the next 
few days ..•. He said that he and his party aspired to Viet-
Nam 
I independence I in an 'Union Francaise ' • 
He said that 
they would like to receive some 'help' from us, but did not 
specify what he meant by that . 
He took occasion to say that 
he was not a cormnunist. 
"From the general fuzziness of his remarks, I gathered 
that he '\wuld like us to get into the game and he would be 
very pleased if he could use us in some way or other in his 
future ' negotiations with the French authorities. 
"I expressed our interest in Indochina and the people 
of Indochina but made no commitments. II 25/ 
L?Dderlining adde~7 
Under Secretary of State Dean Acheson, for one, was not alto-
gether persuaded by Ho's representations. 
In December, 1946, he cabled 
a U.S. diplomat in Hanoi the follmving instructions: 
"Assume you will see Ho in Hanoi and offer following 
summary our present thinking as guide. 
"Keep in mind Ho's clear record as agent international 
communism, absence evidence recantation MOSCOif affiliations, 
confused political situation France and support Ho receiving 
French Communist Party. 
Least desirable eventuality would 
be establishment Communist-dominated, Moscow-oriented state 
Indochina in view DEPT, which most interested INFO strength 
non-communist elements Vietnam. 
Report fully, repeating or 
requesting DEPT repeat Paris .••• 
"If Ho t~es stand non-implementation promise by French 
of Cochinchina referendum relieves Vietnam responsibility 
compliance with agreements, you might if you consider advis-
able raise question whether he believes referendum after such 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-42 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
long disorder could produce worthvlhile result and whether he 
considers compromise on status Cochinchina could possibly be 
reached through negotiation. 
"May say American people have welcomed attainments Indo-
chinese in efforts realize praiseworthy aspirations greater 
autonomy in framework democratic institutions and it would 
be regrettabl e should this interest and sympathy be imperilled 
by any tendency Vietnam administration force i ssues by intran-
sigence and violence. 
"May inform Ho jJj.S. Ambassador, Parii! discussing situa-
tion French similar frankness ... o 
"Avoid impression US Govt making formal intervention this 
, juncture. Publicity any kind would be unfortunate. II 26/ 
In response to Under Secretary Acheson I s telegram, the follm-ling 
was reported to Washington on December 17, 1946 -- just before the out-
break of hostilities in Hanoi: 
tlAfter conversations with French and Vietnamese officials 
and British, Chinese and US Consuls Hanoi Mr. Abbot Moffat, 
who is at present in SEA, has developed views in which Consul 
Saigon concurs along the following lines: 
tiThe Vietnam Government is in control of a small Commu-
nist group possibly in indirect touch with Moscmv and direct 
touch with Yenan . 
A nationalist group is utilizing Communist 
party techniques and discipline ''lith which they are familiar. 
The people are conservative landowners and attempts to com-
munize the country are secondary and would await successful 
operation of a nationalist state. Apparently some leaders, 
like Ho Chi Minh, consider collaboration with the French 
essential; those like Giap (Vo Nguyen Giap, Minister of Na-
tional Defense) 'would avoid collaboration f earing French 
domination but might not reject French influence and aid. 
Nationalist sentiment runs deep among the Vietnamese and 
does opposition to the French, and they might easily turn 
agains~ all whites. 
French influence is important not only 
as an antidot'e to Soviet influence but to protect Vietnam 
and SEA from future Chinese imperialism. 
Delay in achieving 
a settlement will progressively diminish the possibility of 
ultimate French influence . 
! 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
c-43 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
liThe honesty of both French and Vietnamese officials is 
questionable in connection vrith recent incidents. 0' Sullivan 
(U.S. Vice-Consul, Hanoi) believes the Vietnamese were re-
sponsible for the November 20 incident, but it se6fiS clear 
that with a different French commander at Haiphong than 
Colonel Debes, who is notorious for graft and brutality and 
who has admitted that he cannot control his mill troops, the 
trouble might have been confined to the original incidents. 
IIAccording to the French, the Vietnamese enlarge their 
claims after each agreement and are so impractical and 
doctrinaire that all conversations are ineffectual. The 
Vietnamese feel that the French renege on each agreement 
and are trying to reestablish control. 
How·ever, both say 
they have approximately the same objectives, although Giap 
says Vietnam opposes a political Indochinese federation but 
favors a federation dealing ·wi th common economic problems. 
Moffat has mentioned to the French three apparent basic 
troubles: (a) complete mutual distrust, (b) failure of the 
French to resolve their ovm vie'''s on 'free state within 
French Union', (c) almost childish Vietnamese attitude and 
knowledge of economic questions and vague groping for 
'independence '. Agreement cannot be reached by trying to 
reach accords on incidental problems. 
Basic Vietnam pOvTers 
and relations vTi th France must first be · established. 
Not 
only new faces are needed but neutral good offices or even 
mediation may be essential." -l(-
The U.S. official position r emained essentially unchanged there-
after. 
A few months later, after fighting broke out in North Vietnam, 
Secretary of State Marshall stated that: 
"Furthermore, there is no escape from fact that trend of 
times i s to effect that colonial empires in XIX Century sense 
are rapidly becoming thing of past. Action Brit i n India and 
Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are outstanding examples this 
* U.S. Department of State Telegram, from Washington, 17 December 
1946. 
c-44 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
\ -
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
trend, and French themselves took cognizance of it both in new 
Constitution and in their agreements with Vietnam. 
On other 
hand we do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct 
Communist connections and it should be obvious that we are 
not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations 
supplanted by philosophy and political organizations emanat-
ing from and controll~d by Kremlin. 
Fact does remain, however, 
that a situation does exist in Indochina which can no longer 
be considered, if it ever was considered, to be of a local 
character. 27/ 
In May, 1949, Dean Acheson, then Secretary of state, instructed the U.S. 
representative in Hanoi to warn Vietnamese nation01ists against any ac-
ceptance of a coalition with Ho and the Viet Minh: 
" .' •• You may take follmving line as representing consensus 
informed Americans: 
"In light Ho' s kno'ill background, no other assumptions 
possible but that he outright Commie so long as (1) he fails 
unequivocally repudiate Moscolv connections and Commie doc-
trine and (2) remains personally singled out for praise by 
internat' l Commie press and receives its support. 
Moreover, 
US not impressed by nationalist character red flag with 
yellmv stars. 
Question whether Ho as much nationalist as 
Commie is irrelevant. All Stalinists in colonial areas are 
nationalists. With achiev~nent nat'l aims (i.e., indepen-
dence) their objective necessarily becomes subordination 
state to Commie purposes and ruthless extermination not 
only opposition groups but all elements suspected even 
slightest deviation. 
On basis examples eastern Eur it must 
be assumed such wld be goal Ho and men his stamp if included 
Baodai Govt. 
To include them in order achieve reconcilia-
tion opposing polit elements and QTE national unity UNQTE 
wld merely postpone settlement issue "\vhether Vietnam to be 
independent nation or Commie satellite until circumstances 
probably even less favorable nationalists than now. 
It 
must of course be conceded theoretical possibility exists 
estab National Communist state on pattern Yugoslavia in any 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
c-45 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
area beyond reach Soviet army. 
However, US attitude cld take 
acct such possibility only if every other possible avenue 
closed to preservation area from Kremlin control. Moreover, 
~hile Vietnam out of r each Soviet army it will doubtless be 
by no means out of reach Chi Commie hatchet men and armed 
forces. 28/ 
8 . . Ho, Asian Neutral? 
Ho may indeed have never been other than a crafty Leninist, 
seeking a passing accommodation with the French or the U.S. while he 
gathered strength. 
His ·word and deed after 1949 support such a con-
struction: 
In January 1950, the DRV declared itself to be the "only 
lawful government of the entire Vietnamese people," 52/ 
joined the 
Sino-Soviet Bloc, and began attacks on the V.S. "imperialists" and 
"interventionists . II E 
Early in 1951, the DRV legalized the Lao 
Dong Party, expressly communist. ~ 
There remains, how·ever, irresolvable doubt concerning Ho' s 
earlier predilection for neutralism, or even a western affiliation. 
It can be said that, whatever Ho might have preferred, he was offered 
only narrow options. 
No reputable ~vesterner is knOlvn to have inter-
viewed Ho face to face from an abortive French attempt in 1947 to ne-
g~tiate a Cochinchina settlement through late 1954. 32/ Ho had no direct 
means of communication with the U.S. after 1946, and the signals he re-
ceived from the U.S. could hardly have been encouraging. 33/ By 1947, 
U.S. military equipment had already been used by French and British forces 
against the Vietnamese, and the U.S. had arranged credit for French 
purchase of $160 million worth of vehicles and miscellaneous.industrial 
equipment for use in Indochina. 34/ 
Secretary of State George C. 
Marshall's January, 1947, public statement on Vietnam had been confined 
to a hope that "a pacific basis for adjustment of the difficulties 
could be found," 35/ 
and the Marshall Plan for Europe definitely threw 
U.S. resources behind France. 
But assurances from the Russians were not 
materially stronger. While the Soviets excoriated colonial powers other 
than France, potential imminence of a French Communist government 
muffled even their verbal backing of Ho, let alone recognition and 
aid. JY 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
c-46 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
9. 
Ho, Realist 
As a political realist, Ho must have been impressed that the 
DRV was as unlikely to rise in priority over France in U.S. foreign 
policy, as Vietnam was to assert claims on Soviet support over Russian 
preoccupation with Europe. 
In 1946 he put his plight in these terms: 
''We apparently stand quite alone; we shall have to depend on ourselves. "]]} 
After 19~'7, events conspired to alter Ho' s isolation, for while prospects 
for U.S. support dimmed, and in 1950, vanished, Mao Tse Tung -- in whose 
service Ho had spent eight years -- was mOving from triumph to tri-~ph, 
and by late 19~·9, was in a position to render direct assistance to Ho 
across his northern border.;J}) 
Faced "rith an increaSingly serious 
mili tary threat, Ho gravitated quickly tOl·rard the Bloc. 
From Viet Minh 
jungle hideouts came blasts at the U.S. "Marshallization of the YlOrld," 
taking note that the Russians opposed "Marshallization." J2/ 
In 1949, 
after the U. S. had publicly ,.,elcomed the formation of Bao Dai' s "ne,., and 
unified state of Viet Nam," Ho sent delegates to a Peking conference 
where Liu Shao-Chi, in the keynote speech, declared that only the Commu-
nist Party could lead a "national liberation movement." 40/ 
Ho and Mao 
exchanged messages of amity, and neutralist Tito vlaS taken under attack 
by the Viet Minh radio. 
In January, 1950, in response to Ho's declara-
tion that the DRV was Vietnam's only legitimate government, Mao tendered 
formal recognition, and Stalin's followed immediately therea.fter. 41/ 
The die was cast: 
U.S. Secretary of State Dean Acheson declared in 
February, 1950, that t hese recognitions "should remove any illusion as 
to the nationalist character of Ho Chi Minh's aims and reveals Ho in his 
true colors as the mortal enemy of native independence in Indochina." 42/ 
Ho responded in August, 1950, to the first shipments of U.S. aid to 
--
French forces in Vietnam in the follOl.,ing sharp language. 
"Since the beginning of the war the Americans have tried 
to help the French bandits. 
But no,,; they have advanced one 
more step to direct intervention in Viet Nam. 
Thus we have 
now one principal opponent -- the French bandits -- and one 
more opponent -- the American interventionists ••.• 
"On our side, a fe,., years of resistance have brought our 
country the greatest success in the history of Viet Nam __ 
recognition of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam as an equal 
in the world democratic family by the t"l0 biggest countries 
in the world ~- the Soviet Union and democratic China -- and 
by the new democratic countries. 
That means that we are 
definitely on the d.emocratic side and belong to the anti-
imperialist bloc of 800 million people." 43/ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
c-47 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. 
( 
r .. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
10. 
Ho Chi Minh Chronology 
1890 
On 19 May born Nguyen Van Thanh, youngest son of three children 
of Nguyen Tat Sac, a minor government official and revolutionary, 
in Kim Lien Village , Nghe An Province, Annam (Central Vietnam). 
1895 
1904-1905 
1905 
1906-1910 
1910-1911 
1912 
1913 
1914 ) 
1915 ) 
1916 
1917 
1918 
Attended village school and French lycee at Vinh (14 miles 
Kim Lien). 
Carried messages for anti-French underground. 
for his political tirades (Fall). 
from 
Noted 
(Russo-Japanese War. 
Japanese victory greatly influenced Viet-
namese political developments.) 
Dismissed from school for reasons of politics (NVN historians), 
or poor grades (teachers ). 
Transferred to Lycee Quoc Hoc, a prestigious high school, in 
Hue. 
Quoc Hoc was a hotbed of Vietnamese resistance to outside 
influence ; among its graduates were Ngo Dinh Diem, Vo Nguyen Giap, 
and Pham van Dong. 
(To this day, the students of Hue continue 
to strongly i nfluence Vietnamese politics , ~, Hue riots against 
Ky in 1966 .) 
Left school without a diploma; taught school at Lycee Dac-Thanh 
in Phan-Thiet. 
Left Phan Thiet in October t o attend trade 
school (probably cooks and bakers) i n Saigon . 
Worked as messboy aboard French liner SS Le Touche-Treville on 
Saigon-Marseille run. 
Ho carried letter of introduction to 
Phan Chu Trinh, prison mate of Ho's father at Poulo Condore 
land veteran nationalist of Dong Bao (Haircutters ) movement in 
! 1907. 
Failing to a ccept Trinh's nationalism, Ho returned to 
I working on liners travelling the world. 
I 
Worked in kitchens of Carlton Hotel in London under Escoffier, 
famous French chef. Joined Over seas Workers Union, a clandestine 
anti-colonialist group dominated by Chinese . 
I (1914-1916 i s an obscure period -- sometime during the period 
Ho went back t o sea and visited New York, later writing on the 
U.S. r ace probl em in La Race Noire.) 
Ho turned up in Paris, France, to spread influence of anti-
colonialist nationalism to Indochinese conscripted for war 
. I service in France . 
Communist revolution in Russia under Lenin 
I 
which promised national independence for colonial s stimulated 
Ho to deeper involvement in politics. 
I 
Conducted a photograph r etouching business and advertised in 
I Socialist Party's newspaper under the name of Nguyen Ai Quoc 
(The Patriot). 
c-48 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1919 
1920 
1921 
1922 
1923 
1924 
1925 
1926 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(A Vietnamese sailor, Ton Duc Thang, mutinied with another 
communist to turn over a French ship to Russia. 
Thang was 
imprisoned at Poulo Condore and today is Ho's Vice President 
in North Vietnam.) 
Ho prepared a 8-point program of colonial 
grievances to present to the Versailles Peace Conference, 
but his offerings were rejected. 
Attended Baku Conference (First Conference of the Peoples 
of the Far East) on first visit to USSR. 
On return to France, 
Ho attended 18th National Congress of the Socialist Party as 
an Indochinese Delegate in December. 
There he opted for the 
Third International over the Second, because of the former's 
position against colonialism, and thus became a founding mem-
ber cf the French Communist Party (PCF). 
Organized "Union Intercoloniale"-- started as a "front" to 
attract members to the Party from colonial territories --
which published periodical La Paria; edited Viet Nam Hon 
(Soul of Vietnam) which was smuggled to Indochina . 
Attended first Comintern-sponsored conclave (Conference of 
the Workers of the Far East) devoted to communist organization 
of the Far East in Moscow . 
Left France in June to attend several congresses of Kresintern 
(Peasants International) in Moscow' as a PCF delegate in October. 
Lived in USSR for 18 months as colonial representative on 
Kresintern permanent directing committee. 
In Moscow Ho attended Eastern Workers' University and served 
on Kresintern. 
Assigned to Soviet consulate at Canton under Michael Borodin 
as "Chinese translator" -- a cover for organizing Indochina t 
Communist Party into communist groups. 
Launched Vietnam 
Revolutionary Youth League (Viet Nam Cach Menh Thanh Nien 
Hoi), a training school for Indochinese students and emigres, 
in June. 
Ho published a brochure Le Proces de la Colonisation 
Francaise which was carried into Vietnam and bacame the student 
"nationalist" bible. Also in June, Ho is alleged to have 
betrayed Phan Boi Chau, a prominent Vietnamese nationalist 
leader, progenitor of the Vietnamese Nationalist Party (VNQDD), 
to the French security police. 
Ho's intent said to be desire 
for martyr to produce a surge of patriotic sentiment for revo-
lution in Annam -- vlhich it did. 
Translated Marxist terminology into Sino-Annamite. 
Stated 
that "only a communist party can insure the well-being of Annam. II 
Selected members of Ho's youth organization were enrolled in 
Whampoa Military Academy, where Chinese nationalists and com-
munists were trained as future leaders for Kuomintang. 
c-49 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1927 
1928 
1929 
1930 
1931 
1932 
1933 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Conspired to betray Vietnamese "nationalist" students who 
did not join his Youth League at Whampoa. 
Departed Canton in April with Borodin after break betvleen 
Chiang Kai-shek and Mao's communists. 
In Hong Kong transferred 
leadership of Youth League. 
Attended Communist Congress Against Imperialism at Brussels. 
Travelled to Thailand, and there often disguised himself as 
a Buddhist monk. 
Acted as an agent of Third International. 
In July, Ho worked in a colony of Vietnamese emigres numbering 
30,000 in Thailand. 
Organized Annamite Fraternity of Siam 
(Hoi Than Ai Nguoi Annam 0 Xiem). 
Ordered to Hong Kong to 
organize Indochina Communist Party. 
His own Youth League 
the previous May had split into two factions -- one called 
"Indochinese Communist Party"; the other, later, the Annamese 
Communist Party. 
Ho arrived in Hong Kong in January. 
Fused Indochinese Communist 
Party, Annamese Communist Party and Indochinese Communist Alli-
ance into Vietnam Communist Party (Viet Nam Cong San Dang) by 
March. 
Central Committee transferred to Haiphong. 
In October, 
per Comintern wishes, adopted new name of Indochinese Communist 
Party (Dong Duong Cong San Dang). 
Ho attended Third Confer-
ence of the South Seas Communist Party in Singapore in April. 
French sentenced Ho Chi Minh to death in absentia, probably 
as a result of the aftermath of the Yen Bay insurrection in 
February. 
Arrested by British in Hong Kong and imprisoned in June. 
, British acted on French pressure which was suppressing communist/ 
I nationalist unrest in Vietnam at the time. 
Entire apparatus 
I of Indochinese Communist Party was smashed. 
! 
After series of trials in British courts (including appeal on 
Ho's behalf by Sir Stafford Cripps in England), Ho was released 
from Hong Kong Prison in late 1932. 
Went to Singapore, arrested 
again and sent back to Hong Kong. 
Admitted to hospital for 
tuberculosis. 
Nguye.n Ai Quoc reported dead in Hong Kong by French records. 
Disappeared without a trace. 
Believed he was released to 
work secretly for British Intelli gence Service. 
(Congress of ICP held in Ban-Mai, Thailand in April.) 
(Attempts to reconstitute ICP were under leadership of Tran van 
Giau, who had studied at Mosco"r' s Oriental Institute.) 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-50 
1934 
1935 
1936 
1937 
1938 
1939 
1940 
1941 
1942 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ho returned to Moscow in early 1934 for attendance at political 
schools. First attended Institute for National and Political 
Questions in Moscow. 
Later attended "graduate school" for 
senior communist leaders, the Lenin School. 
(Stalin purges 1935-1938 did not involve Ho. 
Apparently, un-
conditionally loyal to Stalin, Ho had to adopt new party line 
of "popular front" as a result of emerging Nazism.) 
Moscow schools. 
Moscow schools. 
With Chinese Communist Eighth Route Army in China. 
Also located 
in Kunming at one time. 
With Eighth Route Army as communications operator. 
(popular 
Front collapsed in France .) 
(French Communist Party dissolved in September at outbreak of 
World War II.) Ho addressed report to Comintern on success of 
"popular frontll policy in Far East. 
ICP Central Committee 
at November congress adopted new Comintern "anti-war" line of 
Stalin-Hitler pact. 
In late 1940, Ho was Political Commissar of a Chinese Communist 
guerrilla training mission under General Yeh Chien-ying training 
nationalists at Liuchow, Kwang-Si Province. 
(In June, France fell to Hitler.) 
Ho headed external directing Bureau of ICP in Kunming, China, 
in September. 
(French crushed Saigon insurrection of ICP, 22 November 1940. 
Numerous arrests followed.) 
Ho turned up in Moscow, and thence travelled to Yenan with 
Nguyen Khanh Toan , Vietnamese teacher at MOSCO'l'l University. 
Crossed into Vietnam at Cao Bang Province in February. 
Organized Viet Minh (Viet Nam Doc La'p Dong Minh Hoi) on 
19 May, as a "united front" group of Vietnamese nationalists 
in China . 
Organized resistance movement in northern Tonkin. 
Ho wa's arrested by Chinese warlord on August 28 as a French 
spy (and jailed for 13 months ) after crossing border into 
China to make contact with Chinese and emigre groups. 
(October 10, the KMT-controlled Vietnam Revolutionary League --
Dong Minh Hoi -- was recognized by Chinese Marshal Chang Fa-kuei.) 
In prison until 16 September, Ho -was released to gather informa-
tion on Japanese troop movements in Indochina for Chinese . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-51 
1944 
1946 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Adopted the name "Ho Chi Minh" (He Who Enlightens). Still 
leader of Viet Minh, Ho became a member of Central Committee 
and temporary Chairman -- of Dong Minh Hoi (Vietnam Revolu-
tionary League ). Both groups received support from China and 
U.S, 
Ho returned to Tonkin clandestinely, devoting efforts 
to the Viet Minh. 
Ho operated in the jungles in North Vietnam. 
He constantly 
sought aid from the U,S. through the O.S.S, 
May 1945 established liberated zone of six provinces in Tonkin 
and was visited by U.S. officer of O.S.S. 
In June, Ho called 
for National Congress, but convening was postponed to August 16 
at Tan Trao. 
Viet Minh program: 
(1) disarm 'Japs before Allied entry 
(2) wrest power from enemy 
(3) be in authority to receive Allied forces. 
August 19, Governor fled, Bao Dai abdicated, and few days 
later National Liberation Committee proclaimed "provisional 
government" with Ho Chi Minh president. 
September 2, Ho Chi Minh declared independence of Vietnam 
Democratic Republic. 
(British land in Saigon-Chinese enter Hanoi.) 
On November 11, Ho dissolved ICP and formed Marxist Study 
Group. 
Ho wrote to President Truman in October and November. 
Appealed to U.S., U.K. USSR and China in February. 
Wrote 
letters to Presjdent Truman on 16 and 18 February. 
Ho formed "coalition" government under Chinese occupation on 
/ March 2, 1946. 
Exercised personal prestige to gain acceptance 
. 6 March 1946 Agreement providing for French replacement of 
I Chinese in Tonkin. 
Ho at Dalat Conference in May, and Fontainebleau, France, in 
August, failed to produce negotiated settlement of differences 
with French. 
On 11 September, Ho told U,S. Ambassador Caffrey 
in Paris that he was not a communist. 
Ho signed modus vivendi 
on 14 September following breakdown of Fontainebleau talks, 
and returned to Hanoi. 
French seized local government in Haiphong and Langson in 
November. 
DRV armed forces attacked French in Hanoi on 19 
December 1946. 
Ho moved DRV govermnent into mountains. 
On April 30, Ho relinquished the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
to his Socialist Under Secretary. 
Ho had Vietnam gover~~ent 
reshuffled twice to form broadest coalition possible against 
French and to avoid "extremist" label by foreigners. 
(French negotiated with Bao Dai to split reSistance.) 
C-52 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1950 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(Giap appointed Minister of National Defense by HO.) 
In March, Ho denounced the charge of "Communist domination" 
of DRV as pure French imperialist propaganda. 
In intervievT by Franc-Tireur, Ho stated his ideology was 
"real unity and independence of our country." 
(BaO Dai established puppet government in July.) 
(Nationalist China falls to Mao Tse-tung; Chinese troops arrive 
on Sino-Tonkin border.) 
Ho appeals for international recognition of DRV. 
(Russia and China recognize DRV.) 
(On June 25, North Korea attacked South Korea.) 
t 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C-53 
1
_. 
_" 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1. C. 2. 
- FOOTNOTES 
1. 
2. 
3· 
4. 
5· 
6. 
7· 
8. 
9· 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13· 
14. 
15· 
16. 
17. 
18. 
Bernard B. Fall, "Ho Chi Minh: Like It Or Not," Esquire, November, 1967, 
p. 121. 
Hoang Van Chi, From Colonialism to Communism, Frederick A. Praeger (New 
York: 1965), pp. 37-38. 
Ellen J. Hammer, The Struggle for Indochina 1940-1954, Stanford Uni-
versity Press, Stanford, Calif., 1965, p. 76. 
Bernard B. Fall, Ho Chi Minh: 
On Revolution, Frederick A. Praeger, 
New York: 1967, p. 27. 
This is a collection of selected writings by 
Ho Chi Minh, 1920-1966. 
Hereafter refer ence will be made to this volume 
as Ho Chi Minh on Revolution. 
Hammer, op. cit., p. 76. 
Hoang Van Chi, op. cit., p. 40. 
Ibid., p. 42. 
Ibid., p. 19-19. 
U.S. Dept of State, Political Alignments of Vietnamese Nationalists, 
(OIR Report No. 3708, 1949), p. 30. 
Ibid. , p. 32. 
Ibid. , p. 34 
Fall, op. cit. , p. 204. 
Ibid. , p. 205· 
Fall, ed., Ho On Revolution, p. 137. 
Hammer, op. cit., pp. 98-105; Fall, ~TO Viet-Nams (New York: Praeger, 
1964), pp. 83-103; Buttinger, Vietnam: A Dragon Embattled (New York: 
Praeger, 1967)) I, pp. 292-300, 344-351. 
Fall, ed., Ho On Revolution, p. 141; CIA, Biographic Handbook, CIA/ 
CR BH ~6, entry for Ho dated 21 January 1965. 
Ibl' d . George A 
Carver Jr 
"The Faceless Viet Cong," Foreign Affairs 
., 
. 
,., 
-
(Vol 44, No.3, April, 1966), pp. 349-351. 
Fall, ed., Ho On Revolution, 150 ff. (by dates). 
C-54 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
19· 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29· 
30. 
31. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Fall, Two Viet-Nams , pp. 101-103; Buttinger, op. cit., I, pp. 266-269; 
Central Intelligence Agency, "Probable Developments in North Vietnam 
to July 1956," (NIE 63.1-55, 19 July 1955), p. 4. 
Ibid.; Robert Shaplen, The Lost Revolution (New York: Harper & Row, 1965), 
XIV. 
Ibid., p. 52; Shaplen also quotes Ho as saying in 1946 "To achieve a 
communist society, big industrial and agricultural production is neces-
sary .•. I do not know when that will be r ealized in Vietnam where pro-
duction is low. 
We are not yet in a position to meet the conditions." 
Ibid., pp. 48-49. 
Buttinger, op . cit., I, pp. 266-269,637 Cf., Fall, 
~Viet-Nams , 
o~. cit., p. 101. 
--
Shaplen, op. cit., p. 48; Hammer, op. cit., p. 173. 
Shaplen, op. cit., p. 53. 
E. g., Isaacs in Gettleman, 
~d., 0t' cit.; Fall, Two Viet-Nams , op. cit., 
pp. 81-82; Shaplen, pp. 28-35, 42- ~4, 47; CIA, Biographic Handbook, 
op. cit. 
U.S. Dept of State telegram from Paris, 6131, to Acheson, September 11, 
1945. 
U.S. Dept of State telegram to Saigon, Acheson 305, December 5, 1945. 
U.S. Dept of State telegram, Marshall 431 to Paris, February 3, 1947. 
U.S. Dept of State telegram t o Hanoi 36, May 20, 1949. 
Fall, ed., Ho on Revolution, p. 198 
I 
Ibid., pp. 199-200 
-
I 
I 
't 
Carver, I op. Cl ., p. 
I 
352; CIA, Biographic Handbook, op. cit. 
32. U.S. Dept of State, Far Eastern Notes (No.8, May 7, 1954), p. 6; 
Shaplen, op. cit., p. 52. 
I 
33. 
34. 
35· 
36. 
37· 
38. 
[intelligence ~iles, OS~, Buttinger, op. cit., II, p. 699. 
Gettlemln, ed .', ~p. cit., p. 55. 
I 
--
-
Ibid., p. 75; Hammer, op. cit., p. 202. 
. I 
I 
Buttinger , op. cit., p. 363; Hammer, op. cit., pp. 201-202. 
Gettlemln, op. cit., p. 55. 
Shaplen', Ope cit., p. 53; Hammer, Ope cit., p. 250. 
C-55 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
39. 
Shaplen, OF· cit., p. 52. 
40. 
Hammer, OF. cit., pp. 249-250 . 
41. 
Ibid. 
42. 
Department of State Bulletin (February 13, 1950), p. 244. 
43. 
Hammer, OF. cit., p. 251. 
C-56 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I 
I 
I.e .3. 
1. C. 3· 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET -
Sensitive 
flO CHI MINH 'S COMMUNICAT IONS WITH THE U. S. 
1945-1946 
TABLE OF CONTENTS a nd OUTLINE 
Resum~ . • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
c-58 
Synopses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
c-63 
C-57 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1. C. 3. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3"3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
HO CHI MINH'S COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE U.S. 
1945-1946 
Resum.~ 
Hots earliest representations to the United States .lere via the 
O.S.S. teams assigned to work with the Viet Minh. 
The Americans 
found Ho genial, and cooperative. 
One American officer subsequently 
reported his experiences with Ho to Robert Shaplen: 
" "There are many facets to the story of Ho's relations 
with the West during and after the Second World War. 
Let us 
start I"lith the somewhat naive but at the same time revealing 
account of a former young lieutenant in the United States 
Army-,-I shall have to refer to him only as John--Vlho in May, 
1945, parachuted into HO's jungle headquarters near the vil-
lage of Kim Lung in northern Tonkin on a mission to establish 
an underground that would help Allied personnel escape to 
freedom. 
Kim Lung lies on the edge of a heavy rain forest, 
thickly underlaid by brush. 
Amid sugar-loaf forraations of 
mountains lie tiny valleys, and it was in one of these, near 
a small stream half-way up a tall hill, that Ho Chi Minh's 
camp, consisting of four huts, lay sequestered. 
Each of the 
huts ioTaS tw"elve feet square, set four feet off the ground on 
bamboo stakes, and HO' s was as bare as the others. 
"In this crude revolutionary cradle, deep in Japanese 
territory, John had the unique experience of living and 
working with Ho for several months. 
He found Ho completely 
co-operative in lending the support of his guerrillas for 
scouting and raiding parties, " including one to reSCue some 
French internees near the China border. 
John used his portable 
radio to put Ho in preliminary touch with French negotiators 
who were in Kunming, China, and who would soon be debating 
Indochina's postwar future with Ho in HanOi, but John himself 
played a more immediate role in Vietnamese affairs by inform-
ally helping Ho frame a Declaration of Independence. 
"'He kept asking mOe if I could remember the language of 
our Declaration,' John says. 
'I was a normal American, I 
couldn't. 
I could have wired up to Kunming and had a copy 
dropped to me, of course, but all he really 'Tanted was the 
flavor of the thing. 
The more we discussed it, the more he 
actually seemed to know about it than I did. 
As a matter of 
fact, he knew more about almost everything than I did, but 
when I thought his demands IV"ere too stiff, I told him anyway. 
Strange thing was he listened. 
He was an awfully sweet guy. 
C-58 
t 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC REI' - Sensitive 
If I had to pick out one quality about that little old man sit-
ting on his hill in the jungle, it was his gentleness. I 
"He and John exchangedltoasts and shared stewed tiger livers. 
John now admits his naivete in being ready to believe that Ho was 
not a Communist. 
But even if he was, John felt certain that Ho 
was sincere in vranting to co-operate with the West, especially 
with France and the United States. 
Some of Ho's men impressed John 
less. 
'They go charging around with great fervor shouting '·inde-
pendence, ' but seventy-five per cent of them don't know the meaning 
of the word,' he vlrote in his diary. 
John still has two letters 
in English Ho sent him in the jungle. 
One of them, written soon 
after the Japanese surrender, ·\-lhen the Vietminh was about to seize 
control of the nationalist movement, reads as follows: 
Dear Lt. [j 0~7, 
I feel i.;reaker since you left. Maybe lId have to follow your 
advice--move to some other place where food is easy to get, to 
improve my health ...• 
I'm sending you a bottle of wine, hope you like it. 
Be so kind as to give me foreign news you got • 
••. Please be good enuf to send to your H.Q. the following 
wires. 
1. Daiviet Lan anti-Vietminh nationalist grouE7 plans to exer-
cise large terror against French and to push it upon shoulder of 
Vl.fL LVietminh Leagui/. 
VML ordered 2 millions members and all 
its population be watchful and stop Daiviet criminal plan when 
& if possible. 
VML declares before the world its aim is national 
independence . 
It fights with political & if necessary military 
means. 
But never resorts to criminal & dishonest act. 
t 
Signed--NATIONAL LIBERATION COMMITTEE 
OF VML 
2. 
National Liberation Committee of VML begs U. S. authorities 
to inform United Nations the following. 
We were fighting Japs 
on the side of the United Nations. 
Now Japs surrendered. 
We 
beg United Nations to realize their solemn promise that all 
nationalities i-Till be given democracy and independence. 
If 
United Nations forget their solemn promise & donlt grant Indo-
china full independence, we will keep fighting until ,·le get it. 
Signed - - LIBERAT ION COlvlIvJ:ITTEE OF VML 
Thank you for all the troubles I give yOu .... Best greetings! 
Yours sincerely, Hoo [Si::]." * 
* Robert Shaplen, The Lost Revolution (New York: Harper & Row, 1965), 28-30. 
C-59 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Similar representations were conveyed to the U.S. via Vietnamese in 
Kunming (see the memorandum from General Donovan, Director of the O.S.S., 
inclosed ) • 
In October, warfare betlveen Vietnamese and French forces began in 
South Vietnam. 
Ho Chi Minh thereupon dispatched a series of communica-
tions 'to the U.S., to China, and to the other great pOl-rers, denying 
France's right to speak. on behalf of Vietnam in the U.N. or other inter-
national forums, and denouncing its "aggression" in Vietnam. 
Ho, in a 
telegram on 17 October 1945, called President Trtilllan's attention to the 
"facts II that establisbment of the U. N. Far East Advisory Commission over-
looked Vietnam membership, that France was not entitled to membership, 
and that the DRV qualified for nation status under the Atlantic Charter. 
Requesting the U.S. to convey his points to the United Nations) Ho 
threat ened that absence of Vietnam would bring forth instability in the 
Far East. 
The telegram ,vas referred from the White House to State which 
duly noted "SEA considers that no action should be taken ...• It 
Within a 
week, Ho Chi Minh appealed via Radio Hanoi to Truman, Attlee, and De Gaulle 
and stated that the "Annamite Nationalist Government" intended to hold a 
plebiscite to give a constitution to Indochina. 
(The French took the 
vie,-r that they were not opposed to Ho per se, but "\-ranted assurance that 
Ho represented the entire population of Indochina.) 
Ho repeatedly referred 
to President Truman's Navy Day address on foreign policy of 27 October 
1945, and pleaded for application of its principles to Vietnam and the 
DRV • . In that speech, the President did not refer to Indochina in any 
f~shion) but the following passage evidently stirred Ho's hopes: 
liThe foreign policy of the United States is based firmly 
on fundamental principles of righteousness and justice . 
In 
carrying out those principles we shall firmly adhere to what we 
believe to be right; and we shall not give our approval to any 
compromise with evil. 
: 
"But we know that we cannot attain perfection in this world 
overnight. 
We shall not let our search for perfection obstruct 
our steady progress tmrard international cooperation. 
We must 
be prepared to fulfill our r esponsibilities as best we can) within 
the framework of our fundamental principles, even though we recog-
nize t):1at .re haye to operate in an imperfect i-rorld. 
I 
; 
"Jft me r.estate the fundamentals of that foreign policy of 
the Unfted States: 
"11. 
We seek no territorial expansion or selfish advantage. 
We haY,e no plans for aggression against any other state, large 
or small. 
We have no objective which need clash with the peace-
ful aims of any other nation. 
! 
112. 
We believe in the eventual return of sovereign rights 
and self-government to all peoples who have been deprived of them 
by force. 
c-60 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"3. 
We shall approve no territorial changes in any friendly 
part of the world unless they accord vith the freely expressed 
wishes of the people concerned. 
"4. 
We believe that all peoples who are prepared for self-
government should be permitted to choose their own form of 
government by their OIVll freely expressed choice, without inter-
ference from any foreign source. 
That is true in Europe, in 
Asia, in Africa, as well as in the Western Hemisphere. 
"5. 
By the combined and cooperative action of our war allies, 
'\ole shall help the defeated enemy states establish peaceful demo-
cratic governments of their mm free choice. 
And .. Te shall try to 
attain a world in "Thich Nazism, Fascism, and military aggression 
cannot exist. 
!'6. 
'\tIe shall refuse to recognize any government imposed upon 
any nation by the force of any foreign pmler. 
In some cases it 
may be impossible to prevent forceful imposition of such a govern-
ment. 
But the United States I-Till not recognize any such government. 
"7. 
We believe that all nations should have the freedom of 
the seas and equal rights to the navigation of boundary rivers and 
waterlvays and of rivers and waterways "lhich pass through more than 
one country. 
118. 
We believe that all states llhich are accepted in the 
society of nations should have access on equal terms to the trade 
and the raw materials of the world. 
119. 
We believe that the sovereign states of the Western Hemis-
phere, .. rithout interference from outside the Western Hemisphere, 
must work together as good neighbors in the solution of their 
common problems. 
t 
"10. We believe that full economic collaboration between all 
nations, great and small, is essential to the improvement of living 
conditions allover the world) and to the establishment of freedom 
from fear and freedom from want. 
1111. We shall continue to strive to pronote freedom of expres-
sion and freedom of religion throughout the peace-loving areas of 
the world. 
1112. We are convinced that the preservation of peace between 
nations requires a United Nations Organization composed of all the 
peace-loving nations of the world who are villing jOintly to use 
force if necessary to insure peace." * 
* Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States (Harry S. Truman, 
April-December 1945), 433-434. 
C-61 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ho Chi Minh fon-larded to the Secretary of State the D.R.V. Declaration 
of Independence, Bao Dai's abdication rescript, general DRV foreign 
policy declarations, and its expressed position on the war in South 
Vietnam. 
He cited the Atlantic Charter as the ' Itfoundation of future 
Vietnamlt and the San Francisco Charter as eradicating colonial oppres-
sion. 
Ho appealed for Itimroediate interference lt and submitted several 
requests -- the key one being that the United Nations should recognize 
the full independence of Vietnam. 
Again, in November, he made three 
points: 
(1) the French had ignored all treaties at the end of the war 
and attacked Saigon in September; (2) the Vietnamese people were willing 
to support the United Nations, but would fight any French troops coming 
into Vietnamese territory; and (3) any bloodshed would be the responsi-
bility of the French. 
Tim 1-leeks later, Ho appealed to President Truman 
and UNRRA for assistance to combat starvation caused by flood, drought, 
and French conflict. Also in November, Ho wrote to the Secretary of 
State asking to establish cultural relations with the U.S. by sending 
fifty Vietnamese students to the U.S., and to complain of the absence 
of Vietnamese representation at the Washington Conference for the Far 
~st. Prompted by Truman's appointment of General Marshall as special 
representative in China, early in 1946 Ho Chi Minh again appealed for 
direct intervention by the U.S. to provide an immediate solution of the 
Vietnamese issue. 
On 16 February 1946, a tone of irritation was intro-
duced: 
Ho wrote once more to President Truman implying Itcomplicity, 
or at least, the connivance of the Great Democracies lt in the French 
aggression; but still Ho pleaded with the U.S. to take a Itdecisive steplt 
in support of Vietnamese independence asking only what had been Itgraci-
ously granted to the Philippines. It 
Ho then addressed an urgent broad-
cast appeal to the U.S., China, Russia, and Great Britain for Itinterference lt 
by the Bj.g Four to stop the bloodshed and to bring the Indochina issue 
before the United Nations. 
It became abundantly clear, however, that the U.S. would do nothing 
to aid the Viet Minh. 
Assuming the sincerity of Ho Chi Minh's appeals, 
the most opportune time for the U.S. to have intervened in Vietnam 
passed in autumn, 1945, and prospects for U.S. action dimmed as DRV 
negotiations i{ith the French proceeded in February-March 1946. 
Paradox-
ically, it was the possibility of communist accession to power in France 
that both added to Ho's incentive to negotiate with the French, and 
stimulated stronger U.S. support for France. 
Ultimately, the U.S. was 
deterred from backing Viet Minh anti-colonialism (though the U.S. pres-
sured France for concessions to Viet nationalism) because its interests 
seemed more directly engaged in shoring up the /French as a key part of 
its assistance to European recovery. 
On the other hand, Ho Chi Minh 
continued to hope for a new France, breaking away from its old coloni-
alist policies under a Socialist or Communist government. 
Ho Chi Minh's correspondence with the U.S. ceased after the 6 March 
1946 Accord with France, although Ho Chi Minh did visit the U.S. Embassy 
in Paris on 11 September 1946 t 
c-62 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
August 22, 1945: 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Synopses 
Memorandum for the Secretary of State from the 
Director, O.S.S. 
Reports a liberal French 
attitude towards Indochina (based on assertions 
of Major Sainteny) and desire of Vietnamese for 
protectorate status under U.S. (bas ed on asser-
tions of Viet Minh and Dong Minh Hoi repre-
sentatives ) ................................. e'te ••• c-66 
September 29, 1945: Telegram from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, to 
Secretary of State, dated October 18, 1945. 
Summarizes letter from Ho Chi Mirill to Presi-
dent of U.S., expressing sympathy at the 
death of Colonel Peter Dewey, O.S.S. Comman-
der·in Saigon. 
Enjoins President to provide 
advance notice of movements of American 
nationals, but expresses appreciation for 
"U.S. stand for international justice and 
October 17, 1945: 
October 22, 1945: 
October 23, 
I 
. I 
i 
~945 : 
November 1, 1945: 
i 
peace. 'f •••••••••••••••••. •••••••••••••••••••••••• c-69 
Telegram, Ho Chi Minh to President Truman. 
Appeals for DRV membership on UN Advisory 
Commission for the Far East., citing Atlant.ic 
Charter to advance its claims to membership 
vice thos e of France. . . • • . • • • . . • . . . . • • . . . . • . . . . •. C-71 
Letter , Ho Chi Minh to U.S. Secretary of State, 
calls for immediate interference by the UN. 
Appealing to the Atlantic Charter and the UN 
Charter, and warning of general warfare in Far 
East, Ho calls for UN action to interfere 
with France, including an ItInquiry Commission. " .. c-80 
U.S. Ambassador in Paris r eports newspaper 
reports of radio appea,l of Ho to President 
Truman and other western l eaders , announcing 
plan to hold plebescite. 
French government 
announces it would not oppose in principle 
such a plebescite if Ho Chi Minh represents 
all of Indochina and not merely Viet Minh ..••..•. C-75 
Letter from Ho Chi Minh to James Byrnes, 
Secretary of State, proposing to send a 
delegation of 50 Viet youths to the U.S. 
to promote friendly cultural relations and 
to study at U.S. universities ..••.•.....•••.•.•.• C-90 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
c-63 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
November 5, 1945: 
Despatch, Philip D. Sprouse, U.S. Consul, 
Kunming, to Secretary of State. 
Incloses 
22 October letter of Ho, surveys situation 
in Vietnam based on reports of Colonel 
Nordlinger, USA, and reports Ho a.nd Bao 
Dai attempt to visit Chiang Kai-shek .............. C-76 
November 8, 1945: 
U.S. Embassy, Chungking summarizes Ho Chi 
Minh letter addressed to President Truman 
and Chiang Kai-shek underscoring French loss 
of sovereignty, DRV acquisition of same, and 
aggression by French to r egain it. Asserts 
French bear onus of resuming war of aggression 
in Far East ........................................ c-84 
November 23, 1945: 
Telegram from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, para-
phrases letters from Ho Chi Minh to President 
Truman and Director General of UNRRA, des-
cribing famine in North Vietnam, and appeal-
ing for relief .................................... c-87 
Wovember 26, 1945: 
January 18, 
I 
I 
I 
1946: 
I 
February 16, 1946: 
i 
I 
I 
Despatch from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, in-
closing Ho's letter of 1 November; letter of 
28 October from Ho to ChiargKai-shek urging 
Chiang to stop the British-French-Japanese 
action in Cochinchina; and an undated tele-
gram to the Secretary of State protesting 
that France did not have the right to speak 
for Vietnam in international councils, and 
appealing to all free nations of the world 
to stop conflict in South Vietnam ..•.•...•••.....• c-89 
Telegram from U.S. Embassy, Chungking, dated 
13 February 1946, paraphrasing letter from 
Ho to President Truman, dated 18 January 1946, 
reminding that peace is indivisible and re-
questing President's intervention for immedi-
ate resolution of Vietnam issue. 
Telegram 
describes identical letter to General Marshall, 
same date ......................................... C-93 
Letter signed by Ho Chi Minh to President of 
the U.S. cites the principles supported by 
the U.S. before, during and after the war, 
and in the UN; to call for U.S. aid to Viet-
nam in the face of French aggression. 
Ho 
asks what has been granted the Philippines --
"like the Philippines our goal is full inde-
pendence and full cooperation with the 
UNITED STATES." •.....••••••••••.•••.•...•.••...•. C-95 
c-64 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
February 18, 1946: 
Note from the DRV to Governments of China, USA, 
USSR, and Great Britain, calls attention to 
Vichy-French collaboration with Japan in Indo-
china, and to policies vlhich led to famine among 
the Vietnamese. 
Again on March 9, 1945, the 
French acceded to the Japanese seizure of power. 
By contrast, the Vietne,mese resistance had 
fought the Japanese all through the years, and 
in August , 1945, ousted Nippon's regime, and 
founded the DRV. 
The DRV is based on principles 
enunciated by Sun Yat Sen and President Truman . 
Impressive progress has been achieved by the 
DRV in North Vietnam, but in South Vietnam, 
French aggression has obtruded. 
DRV urgently 
appeals for interference by allies to halt the 
conflict, and the placing of the Indochina 
issu.e before the UN .• ·.•.. . • . • • • . . . . . • • • . . . • . . • . • .• C-98 
February 27, 1946: 
Telegram from Assistant Chief of the Division 
of Southeast Asian Affairs, U.S. Department 
of State (Landon), to the Secretary of State, 
from Hanoi, received in Washington February 27. 
Summarizes state of negotiations between French 
(Sainteny) and DRV. 
Reports that Ho Chi Minh 
handed Landon two l etters addressed to President 
of the U.S., asserting that Vietnalliese will 
fight until UN intervenes in Vietnam. 
Requests 
U.S. support Vietnamese independence "according 
to Philippines example ." .•.•....•.............•.. C-IOl 
September 11, 1946: Memorandum of conversation with Ho Chi Minh 
by the First Secretary, U.S. Embassy, Paris, 
dated September 12, 1946. 
Ho describes his 
O.S.S. contacts, denies having communist 
connections and indicates that he hoped to 
obtain aid from the United States. 
He refers 
specifically to economic aid, but hints at 
military and naval assistance, ~., mentions 
the naval base at Cam Ranh Bay .................... C-I02 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
c-65 
- .. 
. .:: - . '-J-" 
\ 
. 
0 'der 13526 Section 3.3 
Declassified per Executlv~33116 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
NND project Number. NND 
-~ ( -T ... 
OFFICE 
, . 
¢-66 
"' .' . 
. . 
i 
! 
- i 
I 
j 
i 
i 
! 
i 
. I 
I 
! : 
I 
i 
, 
-1 
.j 
'j 
) 
I 
.1 
r1 
~ i 
j 
1 . 
1 
I 
i 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.' 
.~, 
• ~_ 
.~ I' 
. . . 
. 
i .: -' ; : 
! . .:; ~: 
_ { 
~~ ~.» ':'; ; 
~ :~:~. ~ ':;'"' : 
':; ':) i ··:-.5 .... -.... ~ 1 f 
.~.: 
: ""1 
rrITJ~ conclusion, the Indo ~Chin ese TiOuld like to be plac!:;c1 on. 
the S8.111'2 status as t.he Ppilippin2s . for an ll.l1c1ete:cmined per-
o · 
~1 n 
lO,- " 
.c-67 
l 
I" 
, .\ 
. 1 
'.1 
! 
.i 
f \ . 
i 
·1 
I 
I 
".J 
:. / 
I 
I 
I 
1 I ' 
I 
1 
.. ; .... 
Decla~sified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 B . NW 
. 
y. 
D Date: 2011 
. ,.,. 
.:... 
~~ :.;: "' •• _ 
\
.1 ... .. . -. 
. 
, ._ 
Reuorts fro:I', Kandy st.ate that Col. Roos? Chief of the SI.F'EO Hl 
C 1 
,\. 
lS no'" e ...... -n,.."u·
I.,.., .Lo 
~-:l'"1"""-
''''0 ........ 1.0
. ~O·l··.!.. '"n .1. 1";", J"D"··) 
a ... cu·('\/3. 9 
." 
u 
.!,,} 
1.1;:; 
V 
~.c~ .. t>}lJ. 
V 
l· u,c\.v.:. (.1.:0 
_~ 
01..,-:;: 
c;'"- GL~ 
ese su:crenclCl' on the staff of t.h·? Brit.ish l"epl'esentatives. 
With 
Col. Roos i s Col . . Fay, fOJ'm8?ly FI'8nch Ail' Att8.cne :in . .Krmnd.ng, 
whose exact status is 'lrnCleteT·~zdD.ecI, but YinO is ' -a member of Lord 
Mountbatten's ·ste.ff . 
. ) 
i 
1 • 
/
'" ". 
.' 
f 
: 
'1" . 
. "' , 
·r 
I 
. 1 
"j 
". - . 
J 
: ~ .. 
W"l-' " 
T 
i;l .. llam ~ • Donovc.n 
" 
.I" ~ ". ' 
. 
~ . 
.:-' 
.. ' 
-
:, 
. .... 
. " 
. '.-
. ' . 
'. 
. 1"" 
. ". 
' . .. ~ 
·. c-fB 
i 
I 
~ ... 
. 
t-
, . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526 S t' 
3 3 
, ec Ion . 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. ;....~.,.). .. -
.. -I" .... .. . 
II 
r 
C) 
r 0" 
~ 
" 
I. ';1' I ailee/., ·,r:'. 
l I 
1;;)'0' 
:} 
u ' 
C 
t-:L'H .. 3 
JlE:-2 
r~ 
o 
.... ,..., .... )r. . . .. . . 
I I 
L 
i:C-H}2 ~; .. C . 
7111n tclu;:l'fln nunt bo 
010(101:r ;,o'r"phrnnod bo--
toro buln(: oonnun1ontod 
to o.nyono.. 
(5ZCR~~) 
6oorot~ry )t Stnto 
\1nohlnc;ton 
1020, Ootober la, 10 n.n. 
Dl\ tou 00 to bel' 10. ,1 O'.(i 
1hc,ro 1'0110\;10 ounnn1'Y ot letter tlo.tc<l at Mo01 
Soptcnbor ~ tlMreooodto ?rcolclont ot UZ b'J Ho Ch1 d 
,,;}O tI1Ctlod no ';'rooldont of I'rov101onnl Covt of ~c.:,\:'.JUo 
I 
or Vlot-lbnl; lettor ",no t'lo11.vero<l to U:; Cicncl":ll. C-illlc,C:·o'." 
hend or Chlneo r, Conbn\ Connfll\l! Llnloon (il"OU~ \11th C'dnc'oo 0 
forcon 1n l:o:-t~ Inc!()Qh~ M o.n'l torvnrclod to tOo.loOy ~hroUi:h I 
, . 
. 
. 
I 
us AXny oh~nnol~l 
&\lGon rn110 50~tonbor 27 ro~rtocl k1l11~~ 0: U~ 
Coloncrl I'otor Do~o:r 1n oourau ot ' r~onoh 1notlr.ntc~ olt\ch 
'bctvoon V10t-llfI1060 MUonr.Usto nnd trench tlCGI'Ca C;Or3 
I I 
in Ooohln Ch1nh. 
1\0 5n.11.;on 10 in h1\n10 or Frnrloo-!JrlUoh 
foroeo ro~)ort ON)ll.')t bo 1nvoot1Cntec'. now aut '"'0 110;>0 
c1noorell 1t 10 not truc • 
I t 
t 
i 
r , 
I 
t 
r 
c-69 
> '-,.......:.: ·'I' ~""'; ........... 1 : 
, 
I f 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.. 
,~_.........--_L __ 
~~""l
·. 
\''''C;7 
r ' ,., . 
I t 
'1~-: 
"." ' ~." .. ".,.."~~_."".,,.-.---~-,.,.,....-,' ,,,-~~--:,".,....-- ~t. I 
. 
j :.1' 
•.• . ~.""·.illl-\ .... ·.-.A:.J.&.:Ao..o .... ,.~ 
.. """~ 
.......... J... ...... ' • ...:..l.<"_.-J.J-...w'_ .... '\.o,..~.~~ • ..;............ ....... "---.. ...... _ ..... ____ ___ .......... ..:--..~ _ _.. .. _ _ _ 
I 
. 
, 
0",' 
:' 
o 
o 
-2-
t/162Q, C<1tobol" 18, 10 1\.11 •• fran Chur.,::lt1n~ vln 
Br1t1oll. no nnttor ",hat tho 01\00 nws ClO'!IIS Uo doopl:l onil 
"0 \11l1 <10 utnoot to Donroh out o~pri to nnd. pun1ah t.hoo 
covoroly. HonouraD nro bolnl tnkon to prevont turthor 
I 
Duoh lnoldonto. 
Vo noouro you vo nro no proto~~dly n~~ooto~ 
by denth at nny Anorionn rool~ont 1n this oountr7 no by 
thnt ot donroat rolnt1voo. 
\10 nolt onll of your roproaontnt1voo 1n thie oountry to 
Givo u~ ndvnooo notioo ot UDVononto ot your nnUonnie 
. Mel to bo noro onut1ouo 1n Itroo;>noc;lnull t!ch~lnf,' Ilrc1Ct 
Thl0 w1ll tw:>lc1 Moldenta r.nd n1el 1n wolooo1~ c:'lononotr.\. 
'lono. 
(Sont to Dopt repentcd to ?nrlo) 
I noauro you ot nd.nlrnt10n nn~ fr1ondohlp wo too~ 
tOIr.\r(\ A.norloD.n ~coplo nnt! 1 til roprooontnU'(oo horo • . 
Thtlt ouoh 1'1'1cn<11" foclln;;o hav.) boon cxh1b1tccl not oAly 
• 
T 
I 
to MIJrlcann thor1(3cl vo~ but nlol ) to In,ontoro 1n ~~ncriol\n 
I 
unifol"l1 10 :,root thnt U5 Dtnnc\ tor 1ntornatloM1 Juotloo 
:wa llCMC 1t; np~rcol 'l:;c<l by ontlro Vlot ... !::\nooo fl.:\t1on 
I oonvoy to l lOU Hr. "rolll<lont M<1 to ;.norloan 1)Cp:)10 
o~.lrcoolon or our \,rant roo~oot I\nd ~1rntlon czhw or 
I 
,I 
. 
r~~---""""-''------'-'''''-''-'''-~--~-''''''--'--''''''-~----"----- I 
" ~1 0·,,:-: :, : - ~o<'ir, 
,Ie),! 
e .. '
. 
C-70 
, 
.• : 
t. 
:~- ' 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. . ' 
. ., 
r 
'. , 
n r.(' 
t:I! 
1 
(Jjltce .h~Le'/?ZO?'C5n?/J!ln · UNITED STA1'ES GOVEltNMENT 
SU})J EC?:~~'eleZ11e~J to rj~cesj.(18:r]. ·t 
}~o Chi Einh. 
VAT1·:: Hov. 15, 1945 
. I 
. 
" 
.' 
SEA cons ide:",~; 
tJ-:.i~:c no 2,.ction Sl-lOI)lc1 
be ' t2.~ ':Gn on th8 C':c.tc~cl".ed te182)· ... cilYJ fn)f.1 
-_:..To en; : -inh -"0 "-h ·:::. 
i)-('''''
'- 'iu
-'':->n~-
"'-'(' ll c'C· -'- l-·,'),:t 
~. 
'
.I,. 
•• _..:-
_ , .!. . __ ____ 
l , 
l.. _ _ C 
__ 1',. ..... 0_ .. v_ ... t.. 
"c.i. _"-'.JV 
.... b 
menbership of tte so-called Viet~Nrun 
f{epubl:i.c on the Far' I~ast(-;l 'n Ldvisory 
-" 
\~,
. 
-
v' 
- 'i. 0Y. 
J 
" 
. .. 
. . 
' 
I ' 
i 
. - . 
,.,,', " 
";'r~ 
I 
C-71 
. 
. 
-' 
. 
. . 
" , 
! 
, 
i 
I' 
_.i_. 
~ 
-"'v 
~ 
~ ; 
" 
,', 
I 
!\ 
.... -,. 
. ~ 
_ .. -_ .... 
,. - . 
.. 
' r 
~-::. : ' j~~ 
· r . 
0,: ___ ,. , . . : 
-; . 
,...-
I"" 
' 
- ' 
~ -
\~ .. 
"-
!' 
! 
............ 
-.--.:-.... 
~ .. -
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.' 
/' 
\. 
r 
~ '-
~ 
. --, 
' . ' 
,j' 
THE WHHL:: HOUSE 
" 
!\1 ¥ C () Lt:Ll.J.'J:. 
E~:ecut:j~··V8 C:Lcj:'~:: 
C-72 
i 
I 
I 
. ! 
! 
'. 
! 
~--
{ 
\ 
'-, 
~~. . 
! 
,------
,. 
, 
: 
I
, '-, 
' . 
\~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1 .'N R,i,. YI-9- V I 1\ RCA 
~~~--;~ 
p. 
Li. Ho CHI (./;\h:A PRES10[fn 0;:-
HIE PROVISIOi;/\L OF VIETNMJ DEt.:ocr~:\ Tlc 
REPU8L! C TO f)nES I DEtlT T6'.ur:.1AN, 'JASHi NGTON e 
....--------:-------- --.-- -.• - . - - -- - - -
- ------~-- - -----._--_._----
ESt" {J,EL I SH1.-' UJT O~-
i\OV I 50f-;Y 
CO~:: i.J I 58 IOt4 FOR TH E FA F{ 
E AS,' ISH E M,n I L Y 
VIELCO ifl E BY V I ETi-J M,:U.1E PEOPLE I fJ 
PFI I NC I PLE STOP. 
T,'\K I rJG 
I ~;TC 
CO:·JS I DEI~-
, 
TION PRIMO THE STRATEGICAL AND ECONOMICAL IMPORTANCE OF VIETNAM 
SECUHf)O THE 
E:,r~NEST D~:SlfIE ','/HICH 'VIETNM;l DE.[PLYFEELS MJD 
HI\~ UNI~N II,lOLlS: 
L, 
MMJIFEST·ED TO COOPEF:!\TE 'iitTH THE OniU~· [:EI.!UCRACIl:.S IN THE 
I 
EST H3L ! S Hi,;r: in'..: 
\. 
MoJO cor'jSOLIDr\TIOiJ OF V/onLD PEI\C[ Arm PROSP[F(lTY \'jE '.JIE.H TO Cf'.LL THE 
.:: 
ATTUJTIC~'l OF THE jlLLIED 
~,JJ\TIOrJS orJ THE 
FOl.l.O \'Jli~G POlr~T S COLON 
. 
, 
F I ns-( i~8SENCE OF \j I ETtJ:,,r,1Ar'JD PfiEoLNCE OF 
Fr~iHJ CE I ~I THE 
f\()\f I sonY 
COMMISSION LEADS TO THE CONCLUSION THAT F~~NCE 
... 
I tl T 0 
F~ [ P fi E S UlT T H [ 
.. 
-.... 
I , 
'-
I 
i • 
~ 
t~ 
V I ETr~M!iESE PEOPLE AT THe:. CW-.1!".i I SS I OfJ STOP 
:3UCH 
F!EP~\E0ErHi~T I en 
I.S GfWU;·jt>: 
-----
'" ., 
l.ESS E I THEF! DE Juun Of{ DE F ,~.C-(Q~ STOP. 
DE JunE I'JO l\lLEG I i\f'JCE EX I S-I-~ 
M'·lY r.iORE 8ETV.'EDJ FfU',rJCE MW VIETNM;l COLOi'J 
BAOO:'.! 
tI80L:~HED TRU,TiE.S 
. 
I 
OF 1884 AND 1863 COG~A 
8AODAI 
VOLUNTARILY ~8DICATED TO HhND OVER 
' 
..... ~ 
GOVER:~~ !.\un TO Dr::f:iOCf{ATI C F1EPUE3L I CMJ GOV[f-IW;lEwr COr.ifJA 
f')R0V I S I Oi~;.\L 
I· 
GOVE fU.F:iE rn RE <CTOP. I\T"EO ,\80L! SH ~,~nn OF IRE 1\\ I E:S OF 18b4 MJO 1 G6~ STOP 
. 
1---" 
DE Fi\CTO 
SlfJCE l'':M~cH fJlWfH FP.M~CE HI\Vlr'~G IL\iWED OVER GOVUdJ;j::, C f"( ULC 
i 
I 
TO 
J~\P:'. N !-if,S 8,Wf(UJ i:'lL: ;},m~INISn?i\TiVE Llm<s WITH VIETr·J/\;:I , 
S!f'~CE hUGUS-:', 
I 
. 
. . .
. 
:' 
-... 
'\ 
i8,
·
l
'j~5, PflO~I::;!Cr-J;, L Gq'ju<r;i.~E f'll HI,S 8f:UJ J\ 
DE F,".C;'U 
Ifoi ~~; ~:t-)t.tJ -C-Ein 
. -
~ 
........ . 
GOVEr! :F.!Ei;T I 'J 
r:-'/r· '· y 
F· r:- --n -C-· 
R'· '·LI'I" 
l ' j('I C·'-' ·l- r. 
It'''::' 
.-. 
,
. y'
. 
"" --0 
." 
\- \i c., :< 
<I..-ur't. 
I, 
~L.;\....... 
I" LJ~_
i 'J 
0 
'I'J \,) ,\! \.-.t)i; 
f I ~ ~) I 
[~·t ~ 1 t. 
sy 
rWL'0E[; 
U~1,-.r11 ;,I 'JUS D I S/,PPr;()V,\L LE;:"D' r·le TO F: GHT 
rOi~ 
C-13 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
SECOfJD FnMlCE 18 NOT Ernl-rLED BECAUSE SHE HAD
· IGrW~ .l lrJ!OUSLY 
SOLO 
I~OO CHINA TO JAPAN AND BETRAYED THE ALl.IES 
THIRD V(ETDh~ 
-
----: 
IS QUALIFIED BY ATL~NTtc CHARTER 
At-JQ 
SU8SE:~U un PE ;\CE AGf1EEL1Eirc 
MW BY HEr.: COO o I.'!! LL MiD I-:Ef< Ur'JFL I filCH I NG STr.dW FOR OEi,.iOCRi\CY -(0 
8E f<EPFiESUiTEO "'-f TliE Aov 120W( COf·M,·112,~) I or~. ~.hop 
':1E 
Af~r: CONV I NeEO 
,"(I-!/i-I" VIETr~A Lj p,T COfvirvi l:':;SIOfi UILL BE J\E-)LE TO 
Bl~ILJG EFFECTIVE 
corn;nl'~ 
.. 
I'.O:::;ENCE '.'faUlD OF~lrlG FOFnH 
!L~lSTI\OILITY MJO TEUPOFU.F<Y 
CHI\f~i'.c-rER -1"0 
' SOlUTICr,JS OTHEn\'J!SE nEL£)I. 
THEF<EFOr?E \"/E 
EXPF"(ESS EMWEs-r RE'~UEST 
BE VERY GRiHEFUL TO YOUF< EXCE.LLENCY AND 
!)F~E[J i En j,TTLEE PF~EM I U~ 
iks I onu.I).\ TO -I-,-J r. U"J' --C"" D 
1'·1 .. -.- • C • I (~ 
't.... 
I· i j t.... 
1//1 I 
j 
'''00 
I 
.
. 
I 
I F)[:-c'{:J"-c-I-C{!' • v 
\0C. 
'JL..L.) 
Hocu i rill fJS '" 
" 
REco/ll ~O,\f,i 
C-74 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
• • ... 1[·...04 I ····'" H v ........ ., ..... 
~ r,----.::...) '\ r .. /' 
H L:::' t..J t L';:~~ '-.. ~~J a~-~ Jf;~ h ,/ J 
C: t:-: :\j -j ~ F 
~~ /.\ i_ S ~.: : ~:'··2 \1 i C ~.~~; 
~{1:: l .. 1~~3 ~:-~~ I 
\ ~.) f--j tj: 
::: ~":-l~ i (~ ~ ~ 1 
;;.,:,:.;., 
." ,. 
AC~'IOE ~ 
.I"·;O~ 
ll'1FC: 
C:P-1?20 '~G 
S 
Thi.s t: Elq:;ral;l' I'H.ist bE 
U . 
paraDhrasEd bEforE bEing 
C 
;o llim~nicQtEd to anyonE 
ESC 
othEr than n GovErnmEnt 
. 
( n
_ .7S·_·I~.RI~'~"7D ) 
:~uH··3 AgEncy. 
r<. __ 
,_,-_ 
!.:E 
~:~llrJ""c 
.Jr~)- ,2 
of Stat c:, 
Pari::; . 
patEd Octo 23, 1945. 
REC'd 12:48 a.m ., 24th ~ 
~ : !~"'14 
':'10 
liil 
opr 
PL' 
A~-B . ' 
HllshinGt on. 
", -'-
. .r. 
6196, Oct ~ 23, 
0"' 
SPA. 
l~umb[r of po.pu's t oC'.o.y cnrry s ir.'!i 10.1' ['.l't ic 1 E 
(of Vi Et 
rEp'or'ci!13 :Io Chin I:5.)/h, . prEsid[,nt 
" 
" 
~ 
." 
. 
SA 
SA/GN 
SA/L~~2 appE21Ed OVEr Ibnoi r2-dio to i:;rEsidEnt 
T1'LH~io.:"l, PriEE 
JrIJ1-: .. ;; }:I:LnistEl-' LttlEE ono. GEDEral dE GaullE o.nd o.lmouDcEcl 
II 
r-- ./.f!) f 
' 
/.'0 Jj;J:J J . J.. An'nami t E lbt iOl!:J.l ist Govt II int £lids to hold pl Ebisc it E 
~. S .--~-:'-
1/ .:.' 
"
VIi thin two months t o· ~i V E c()rJst it ut ion t CI Indo~Chincl ~ 
I .. " 
-, ' 
.:.:: 
,ArticlE continuES "official FrEnch circlEs" ' rE-
." " . " 
'" 
.:~ rr.c~r'~{ it dOES Dot SEEtl lik~ly ViEt l;1:i.nh \vil1 bE ablE 
. ; ; ~ 
, l' 
~. ' I, V 0 no a such pIe '0 i sci t E Q 
HOWEVEr, FrEnch Govt ·is not 
oPpoSEd in pl'~. ncipl[ to such plEbiscit E' if Eo ChiD 
:. '~inh 
;---___ -:: .. __ .. -- r ~p.r ES EDt s EntirE popu12tioD of·Indo-Chin~ and 
, '. 
'. 
, 
: : Oul:r ccinL:c'cc ijihich F:l'EOch authoritiEs ho.VE held 
'''0 1 -l"F to 
., 
-
t. _." 
JUS 
lIi'~~1 
C'''''\1~1t.lr1E·' 
""'-~Cl ( 
1:",,( . beEn 
t.l·(l -'-t.~'·;·"~l-::-"'" 
._ J- J ", 
J 
........ 
\,J...... 
...... 
I.) 
(". .. J.. 
'-' ~ 
..J... 
j 
__ ...... \I 
L::.,. 
l J 
U 
_ 
..... c. .......... >- J 
R7STnl Te" me-Do 
.~. 
1\,J.... 
.tL 
C-75 
, 
\ 
~ " 1 
LJ-,' L-\ ' 
" . '\ 
. ~ 
"" . : 
, 
t 
I.: ... 
.. ..... 
," 
i.. 
II 
, 
" 
,. 
\. 
'. 
-' 
" 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. . Sir: 
.. 
;_._ ........ -.,.......,. ... _ 
..... - ... .:,.- ~~ 
I () 
::~ \ 
~ , \ 
'.1 I 
; i/ v'l[XJ ::.~ I 
; . j 
<-.: 
':.'i 
Reft!l'rin,:.: . to the Cotli31JlRtc Goncral' s dODpotch NO~ 
21 of ~3ept ern bel' 27, 1 9 /l!) , in r 8Gclrd to t ile sit llCl t ipl1 in 
Indochin8, I have thu honor to enclo so: 
(a) copy of Cl 
letter Dddrcsscd by 110 Chi [:dnh, PrcGident of the "rro-
vi [.:;ion01 Govern,';] ent of tho Democ:c<.l ti c 1~epub1i c of Vi et-
IJ~m".' to t ile ~)ucret/]ry. of 0t/Q ';~ (:; und cr elate of Oc~bor 
2<~, J. 915.;.. (b )tl'cIllS 18 t 10 n 0 f 
a 1 ott er <1[-) t 0<1 Oc to b (jl' 22 J 
1~l4!3, ac111rGssed by Il8IlI0 '/j8n , Division of Overscas 
ilf'foirs official serviu£! vlith the Chinese OccuPclt10u 
porces ir. Indochina, to Generol CHIH Chene , 
Cl1ln e~;o r .. ~in­
ister of ~or ; and (c) translation of a letter doted 
october 22 I 1313, 
odurr.~:;~je d by Eo ' Chi Minh C,::odc rOJIJoni-
Z3 L 10n vi1'i tt en llU Cb ill-mine ) fInd 
~{Uj\i.\j Yunc.;- jui (ilnnami te 
E::x-~Jr,i)erol' poo Tni) to Generalissililo C11ione 1(oi-8i181(0 
C) ~-, 
l" 
I >:~) _I 
::.~\ 
Tile ori [:::Lnols of t hcG C mcsr..[lces were brouGilt to 
, :~,'~., 
,:.-: '\ K~~milinc; on uctolJl.;r, ~>1 ?y t:vo ~nit:?cl S tGte~ )·I1'n,y. officers 
: .;\ 
~/:~ 
., : 
\"'110 llDVc been serVlrlC Hl trw l-UHlCH 
flr co Slnce tUG lotter 
~ ~ "
i 
UI 
~:" .. p(1rt of i~U,::;Uf.)t os n:clI bGl's of [l G~5 Teom for prisoner ef 
1'\1 
::.:\ Vial' r eSCllt;:; work. 
Q.Q).on c)1 
;3tepJl(:;Q...JjQJ.'dli~G.9~ Co~nmo n<lin0 
r', Officsr of tlle 'reElm, inf'orjjlG Ine thnt he is c l..'1rl'yi nc viitl1 
I.,._.,._._.~.-.,,"_J him to ·,1ssl1.Ln.gton t Iw orieinal o[ 'ellO letter to the ,':»ec-
r e tary of state for 8t:l1l'OJ1J:'i.') t i:J ue1i v ery upon his orr i vol 
thero. · Tho ori Ginals () r ti.1C letters to Gcnero 1 Cll e n Ch enG 
fmc1 to GencrEl1issi:-:.o Chi2.rlc K3i-srl(;1<: in a souled envelope 
odc1refJS'::d tV' the seIlllers to General Cbcmt; 131'8 b e ine for-
'I/I:;3ro. eo by this office to tile j.mbas8Y !Jt Chun.:=.;l-:in,:; 1'01' 
) 
deliV(;l'Y throuGh United States ilI'lll,)' clv:lnne1s. 
The offic ors 
, 
who b rOUGrit til 03 C l[C SSOCfJ fJ to Kun:iii ne \';ere not to 1d by 
" ., 
, 
, 
I 
Ho Chi j'.linh O('·t;lC cont (::nts thereof onu tIle lnfol'rIl3tlon 
" '\ '. 
c(Jnt ~Jin(;d in tile ll';tter::; to General Cl1cn ~ ond t he Gcn~r81-
\
"';'.' .\<,{ 
iG~:;ifllO viill os\"(msibly b '.) Imo'.:m only to t.he Chinese 
\ 
.. ;1.\,,\ • 
au t:lorll.i os. · The COl1 r-:i ulot e G \:nerfJ 1 VJO~, r O·ll.le s 'V;d to Jilsk e 
s 
troJ~;JJ.: l tion of the let'ten.:: ill as mUcJ1 os it wos beli p,v e d. 
tlp:)t t11Cy m:l.,jht con t-Din inforIHl tion of 0 
!Ili~i~~lry llFJture 
of concern to the Dnl tf)d 0tlltes J\rmy authorl tIer:;. 
SU:ll'IIC1ry of 
~~ncl(;surcs : 
In hiS lett er to t ;1U 
~)cCrot8rj' 
of st.:J\;() , 110 'Glii i,.illll ::;\:':.I17e,3 tllf:.t 110 
1~3 rOI'V'!O rll~!}~v;..'.r~ou8 
([ocwn en ts y eGf.J 1'0. inc t~~e .Dyer.; ep t 
s.i.:t1:l~~ tio~iD-_Inll ?chL13 • 
TTll '~: -;O dOCUl r,(mts cl1'e b c in0._ron~(-·:: ':i-:'-'::~Q..C_Q1D.Q,'Jnl_r~~ to 
If ;Jello y: ) L8 d S [;}Oo 1;c11. ) 
]u r \.;.l" er5 . \JU 
~.' .('one 11 0 pprt: DS Ion of 
tjle ;\nn:Jm:i t ~s ~)nd t,Jie d'-,::s1;rShof tilO J'innomi tes for r ctl11za-
.' 
I . ~ • 
" . 
,-
I ,. 
r, . 
". 
' . 
-, 
\.; ; 
'-
I 
I 
I I 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
- 2 -
. 
. 
t ion (1 L' l..il(.Jll.:i ;-.. r. i r Jf _'~ (; [·
t,ll C h t Ian t:l C ond Sew ira no ifj co 
Ci][)rt.( ~ rs. 
Eo 
bJ.~Jln C 3 t :,(; 
L" J." _' ncjJ. "for tlH~ D:t.'escat di::;turb-
\ 
3]lQt~.s in Inuocllin:.1 r:lnu :: s;; ;, .I.'or 
: 'i' i !"fl! :~d:L;)t(; int crl'cl' '::!l1CC'' 
bLlb~11.!!l L (;U 1'·1 ,-t t 1 0113 
1 l; :~ r,--th-;;- ::, i t..u.!') Jc,:i:6n rcsul. t in- tIl 0 
St).E~gd 0 ~_ c 0~rl1 c"t--~hl'oue;l~~.--th() i;)r ...:.,c13"l,. 
ne 1I,8k es 
i'bur l'(.!'1u CSGs:-
(-l) -'-TW; -'r~l tun1,j.on shOUld be ' discu,'",!:J 0<1 at 
t .hc fir:3t rne(:; [-,ine; of the .i!'nr j:,;clGtiern j,c1visory Co;nmiss ion' 
. (2) J\nnomite dcle~r,otes ~.ih()uld be el.lov:cd to pre:-jent the ' 
vi eWf~ of th e "Vi ct n::~[1 1 esc Government"; _( 3) on invest i So tion 
camont t('H; should be SOIl t to J.ndo chino; one} (1) the Dni ted 
r,je t iOllS shou.ld r()coCn iz~ j\nnlJllli tn inll e pcmelcnce. 
The chines e Over;:; eel s AffDil'u off :Lci 01 sta to:] th[jt no 
Chi ]\[inh ::lIld FDa rl'[t1 d c .:.;irc to proccl~c1 secretly to Chunc-
kine to t311~ 'iii tIl tlle l~()J".lr.;rol:i.[:I:.3ililO elHl as/(s that 0 
pIEtI~'e 
be sent to Indochino for that ~Jl1l'l'0S0. 
In the lett c i' from 
the .Hl1llw:J.i to loaders to tll C Gen',;rlJiin ~-; i r:lO, they express 
their desire 
'~ o proceed to Ctll.lll;3kinC to pay tilCir resDccts 
to hi:11 and ask for ["\ reply. 
:wud of' Summary. 
~ 
~ 
-
-'<.. 
The United stoter; ~I1'my officers describe concUtio ns in 
Indochiria as follows: 
The situation is complicated by tho food problem, ag-
CraV;jted by the failuro of the Chine s o Occupation Li'ol'COS 
to brin3 l'ood S upr-li (:;8 \'..-1 t11 
tll(~m . 
'l'hcre arc estilrloted to 
be Elpproxili1etely 100,000 Chine se troops in Indochina ot 
prescnt tnd they have tuken over larGO rice sto~cs in the 
lI8ipl1011C DreD whicfl ot il(~ rwiG(; mis llt hClve bcen used to 
rel i eve tho suff crinc: 
Til e ~'roncll have express cd tlleir 
\'JiU . inllw ::,;~~ to tro:-l:,:port ric e 1'1'0[11 0a:i.Con, v_Ilich t Ilt3y w:ish 
to ;::;i ve to del) lers in tilf; lI F.lllOi Gnd i:iaiphonc orea3 for sole, 
as tl1 e most effective rne t :lOcl of distribution. 
Eo Cili l',iinll 
is 'Idilling to Pl";l'!;1.l t tile tr8n::>port of 
~:Juch rice ancl h6S 
EI .·~ re (; d t o sec to its clLJtribution DO a Gift of thG :i!'rcnch 
people but not as [) [i r t from the .i.i'rench Governlllt:;nt. 
Flo (J(ls ' 
h8v e cnus ccl a fifty perc ent 1083 in crops in tllt:; north -::hile 
in 3aicon there ore lorGe exceS8 stocks of rice. 
The 
Chine se are now endeavorinG to a1'rBn ~ c for the tr3ns~ort oft 
rice overlcmd f1'o:11 38icon bU.t thgt; 'NLI_l, of course, be 0 
slo'l! 1'1'OCeS8 , given t he pl'0.sent condition of COi~1 mlJnicot.ions 
feoilities. 
l'l1e J\nnami tos ha ve been Cu.il ty of exceS:';C2 t havine 
killed 20 to ~30 .!Trench 'A'cwlOn8nc1 children held as ho ~;t:::.::;(:;s 
ot saieon and'118vin,G t::'ltcn [llany Ot11(:!l' French llo:.:;t~ ;ses in 
the !Ianed -IIoiphonc :mrJ Vin.h-Hut;) ercas. 
In Ira noi ilnnDmi tt1 
armed squ[)tls ar'3 co nLi.Il'JDlly 88arcllinc French homes for 
hidd (~ ll Wf!flPOl1S on(l t 11 0 sicl1 t of irenchtTi en S tDl1ui n(; o.=:::li [lC'; t 
the \Vall ouLsidc til'jir homes unclE:r ;:,;uDI'd by arnlcd hnn r:1rni tcs 
whil e r,otl-lcTs search the honse is 13 f1'e :luent . on~" 
, 
!uncriCcll13 arc 8xtr8:':ely populer wi th the 1I.nnaCi1.i":.e::; , 
who do evcr?t~linc: Dossible to convince t.ilcm of t llC jU;otice 
of tlleir cause. 
There are still evidenccs of pro-Vicby 
senti:ll':mt in thf~ HerlDi arGO ane} those French who 118VU not 
\) c;en held prison er in t .he ci t8dcl are apt to bL:) suspect 
to t""B thos e 'Nho played 
Cl part in ~!}l~ resistflnce rnov c:n'Jnt. 
#~. 
-.... 
:\ 
. 
C-77 
The 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
" 
-
.1 
-
'1'11',:; r ,;8050 n f'ol' I·li(: f:.:;ilurc oJ: tJ!C) ;.;'1'(.:11C11 
r!;~n' ci~ r.;nt;)tivc
, 
CC:1l::1'.Jl illlc;ssond.ri , to 
~'8 1't.icip':tt, 8 in tllC) 
~T[JpDn e;:-.iC "~ur rc;ld c r 
c ~3 rcm (' nics cit 
~1[lrlO i WO~3 tIl!::: diGploy of t.he .Armor-aitus 0.1..' 011 
~nit ~d ~8Lion8 flacs exccpt - t1~t of the frcnch at the placa 
oj' t11 C C Cl'Cl11ony • 
The j'H1n!:lllli t cs reCu sed to <1i 3ploy 
~11 e French 
fl'JC on the crounds 
tll:~it t118 l"rcncb had colleborElted vlitl1 the 
J8 paneS(; in 1ndoc11in£\ and the Chinese outhmJi'Gies 3upr)ortecl 
the j,I"l11omi tes in the c on teat-ion. 
This feelinS oGoinst the 
French WD[j seen in lilOl1i.:;tCl' trlaes meetinGs held f :ec':iuently in 
Hanoi, til e ./l.;mGmi t 80 hav:i ne t'J kl~n (lV (:1' ;",11 oumini s tr :::1 t10n 
buildincs ond public unlliti es in t hot Ore8. 
~!ey plac8rded 
the ci ty vii th s:lc;ns and 
310.~[11y?, such 83 those 1'eadinf~ TIKill 
the ?rcnch" -
[Jonle of th em in ,-:,11Eli811 for the eyes or- 1,:ner1con3. 
Tl:~C fre:ncll crm, or couJ.''';c , ret.urn t.o IndochlnCl bt"tt it 
vlill be (.1 mistDl\:c uules::.: t!ley ore }H'()pf:lred to r eenter in 
strcncth sufficient t.o oV CrpOi\(; r the /\nn2rnit,e re[3i;jtJ IlC8 in 
s:~ol'L ord er. 
If the ix'snc j1 nttcin;'t to r:)turn to Indocl!irw 
wi :-,Jl0U t oV8rvilteln·,iIV: forces Cil111 impr ~' s,si vc ctir sup;.crt, the 
i 
[:.itl'uG·~;lc \o':ill be 101lG Dn<l bloody. 
Tilo ,/\nnGmi tes h£lVc only 
I licHt arrnS - riflcfJ, c'::Jrbi ne;-; oncl llOnel crcn(H.los 
~ .. ond coulcl 
I not . ~;t(:lnd up £leA ins L l1cuvy ',I;copon:"3. 
'I'rl(!r:;c h£lve be en pro-
vided theIrI by tlle AmericCitl.;j 
[',~3 VII.:;ll A:; by t.he J'ol)·9nese , the 
i ! Amcriccil1 DrillS havin,_; 
b c\-~ n S i v en for~ use 8c;oinst the Jol)ann:;;G 
-prior to 
t~he latter's surrf:'lld( ;~J:'. 
'l'roublrj at present if: con-
fined lEl1'c';ely to the lI[JjlO:i-il[liplloHc; Dad Vinh-llu c areas wi til 
I 
tilE~ ,::"01[:011"" ureo so~a(;whp.t butt er 
btJCElIWG of the prc'Gence of 
hi!';';'..:: nUl,1\)CTS of Br:i tL:dl troops. 
I.l.lo~:l ond C~imboc1i8 are 
l'rt:Jctic[111y fro c: of . 
.t'~nll t·\rni t.e influ1:rlce. 
The Clll nCb c cccupaLi (' Jl. ll'orccs havo been c ircumspf~ct 8nd 
lwve compol.lc:d t.he 
~'Lln::-iJll1t~;s in corne C3ses, at .l\tllcricGn . 
GU' ;~' est ion, to- -re 1 f·~\ se-· .;"-r~llc II . pali t-te G1 ~p ri0on er3. --. - '.i'i·!i2i l;.;:wo 
r;i:v''E;n no <Jrmc tei the ii,:lilO;ldtc)~3; ]j0i1t[;-iid~i:if ~~3 t(jcrilY obt3ininc 
os f!1<Jny 8S po SE; iblc for 1, ; LCJllsel ves. 
Ti1e Chine;~ 0 hove, hO'Never, 
now brouts il t in their O\'in ilrili3 rrli L"u--p'tippet, one Ngu Yon l-iai T8n, 
who is £l member of tho f1nna:ni te Hevolutiohary LeoguG spon-
sored by the EIJ.O ~llint<:1nG in Ch:lna. 
He is said to have been 3n 
exile in ctlina for t. he 1'3,,~ t tv/en ty-.t;:{---:-: - --~-"/ ears. 
He .is 8ssoci-
ateu with tho independence mov8iflent, tiS is his p 3 rty, but 
1188 no place in the Government. 
! 
~ ~-
_ ,~ 
I 
--
. --.-~-
Colonel iJorlllincer, ' the 80l(-L c-:; of mo; ::~~=.,/ t~ 
__ foreGoin8 
inform8tion, stetcs tl1nt he is procoeding to ',J6s11-:~ ;[ton 
shortly and that he will call at the Ueport ~ ent in connection 
with the delivery of Ho Chi r,~inh' s lett er to the Secr e tory of 
..snclosures: 
C-78 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
'. : . ~;~~ 
bnclo~l\lrcs: '\ , 
.. ' " 
1. 
Lott er from Ho Cid J,'linh to tho 
secretary of stutc , _ Cet.ober ?~2, 1915. 
2. 
'l'ranslation of Lc-t.t.f' :!' f('or:l HsilJo Won to 
Gen ers l Chen Gh\; nc; , 00 tob cr 22, 19150 
3. 
Trans lation o f 
J..,n+-,t c:;: from Eo Chi I.1inh and 
pao Tai to GOJlc-l'Glia ;;im() Ghian8 Kai-shelc, 
October 22, 
1 91~ _ 
i/' 
Ori~in31 and hectoeraph to the Departmente 
Copy to Bllbassy, ChungkinG-
eoo PDsprouse/pds 
• 
• 
-" 
C-79 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
U. , ~·,,\.. ' Cj:i \TIC 
The situCltion in ':"'Cl\1: ~ jl V If: t,'lCllil hes reachucl i t8 cri ticul 
S~ i::C(>
. /:IW.l 
.~DJ.~S ror l!i;iil'. (: :i;i
'\'> ~ 
j.lltcrJ'or c nc(~ on tIle part of 
tHe Un.lt()d.l~otlons. 
I ';'." .I :' Il . h:,' t. Ill: prGsent letter to brine 
your ...... xcellcncy :30~ ,j(] i11u l' '.; 
llc~ilt (ll' 
tli/~ CQse of Viotnom 'lillich 
11[1:" 
CO;il(~ for t :w lflst 
t.iJl' (; ~ VJC:H:.' LG into tl:e intern8tiona1 
' 
1 iFl cl ie11 t. 
~ir~t of 811, I b eG to fOl~ard to your Government a 
fuw dOCUlllunt ;·ry 'clCltu, wiJonc; Villich our Dl:!clc11'ation of Inuepen-
demeo, tile I mpcr:Lol n r:;scl'ipt of 1'>X- .i:1nperor BAO ;)1\1 on tr!c 
oc:CU::<i.OlI of lLi.::;: ulJdicoLiL.n J 
tilll; decl
,~ll'[lt ion of our lrovtJrn-
I,'ent c (.' nc t: l'n~nc it:.> €;ellt-;J.'Dl ford, e n poJby ond a note defin:i.nG 
Oll), position to'fiz:!rds t ;l() ij outh VicttVJIll incident. 
liS t1108(; docu'IPmt:::; w:i.l.l o 11 0 ';i ,:,ronr j';xocllency, thr,! Viot-
JH1IIW:.J (; people! Iws 
l'~nu""n (hn'itI G t.he 1;)r-; fj 
f (!\'l years on ovolul;:lon 
which n~Jl.ul'c.llly brLI ~ ;s Lh r; 
Vi'~tn~mll)SC DoLion to i t<"; prosent 
8i tuntion . 
l·l.lter eo yC [ ll' ~j of J.t'rencll opprl)ss:i on Et11(l 
un~j\lCCe8-
s.cu1 
t{lOu~~4 Obf~:tin8te Vi c tn[y,c sc! rc};lstnnco, \'JO 8t 18st Sr)W 
1T1'011CO u·2feClted in .i:,urop(!, 
"LtJ~n her betX'::l:,:al of tho i,LLio:J 
succe8::.:iv uly on bellDlf of Gl~l'llluny Elnd of .Ta non . 
Thou"ll the 
. 
.
... 
l) 
0(1U8 w(jr -c 
LIt, tt10t 
ti;:i'.~ 
(l 2~ 8inst the 1\11108, tllo Vi c:tn£lrrie::.;o , 
leavinG' asido 811 diffoJ.'Lncc8 in politic~l opiniot!, ,uni L~d 
in til'': V:i.ctL[liull L08Cllt! 
~jnci stl.~rt8u on a ruthles;..i 
f'i ~)lt 
Dc[lin;,.;t t.he Ja p811Ct:o. 
~.l;'ll1vlld.h; 1 tho l:ltlontic Glwr..t.(;r-v;as _ 
conc1uu (~d , defininc_ t~~s-or_tJY; .(\lJ .. ics_ uulL.la;/ifls the 
round c l~; ioll aT pea..9...Q.::::J!lDJ:k. 
Tlle noble principles of int '-::rrHJtionol 
Justice onci 
(:~lUQ1it:r of .stiitUi-3 loid dO'/1ll in tflclt c :liJrt er 
stroHi:;l] cli.J~ I ~C11ed to t~lG Vietn81ilese and contributed in l"j":8Jd nS t 
of tl"l~ Victr.linh 1~U3is l~fjl1 C ~; in tile war zone a Ilotion-'/iide 
an ti-J ' D~)alleSe lilOVe [l~ent ' . .,-16c11 found a povvori'ul ecbo in the 
dCriiOcrat ic aspirationD uf the people. 
The j~tlantic Chclrt e r 
VJEJ.o 10oJ,od UDon 83 Lllc foundrJ :, ion of futu.re Vietl18 r1. . 
1. 
ri o Li(Jn-builtrIItcTI';o ~ j 8m V!FJ.~; 
dl'sft~cd VVJ:lich was 1c.1ter fOUlld in 
keepinG Witll Scw 
Ii'l' ':-lnci:~ bo Ci.l1:Jrtr~ r eHlU v"illich has b een fu.lly 
corri 8 cl out; tnc~)':.'. l CI:.;t years: 
contilluous fi Ght a ~~ain8t t11e 
J8:;'2Iae;j (: 
brin ~~inG 8bout tl . .'3 rl:.cov'.;l''j or nfltional inLle)l<::nucnce 
on l\UC,USt 19th, VO] IJ.nt;el'Y 3Quicnti'::m or l:::(- .Hnperor Dau(18i, 
03tCtblish;!icnt of t.hc Dc'nocl' (~t ic ~\t.)public of Vil-;tnOtil, 
o3~; i f3t ­
CInco (:: i ven Lu t11C .olli'-:s 
.i~atio1l8 iil t118 di::;o r ;,w :;ent of tho 
J e,p[1l1'; S G , 
E.1~) poin t~iLcn t of a prov:i. [3 .Lonul Governnt cnt 
~'iltO sc mi s.:: i on 
• VJCJS tc C31'1''{ out tile .ntlf:ll1tic .,,:q ... ·w;t·:H.,I Dnd 3311 i."l'EJncisco Chllr-
terr; 3n ' l' :;,' 1lL\~t, them car ,~ i f;cl out bJ OGlwr nations. 
AS u 
r.i.<:.lttl~r of 
fcICt:...,.._J:'h~~r:('yi:o.G o~.~u o..£.... tR8 
i\t~~H.ll:.ic 
DU~:.1. ~ :on li'ra n ?:~s~o Cltnl'~ ,:: r ~;i 
11~\U f;~3 t l ~~~~CQ~!-:.~~_ ,~F. Lr.pc:r-
'rDll,r.:fll :.i l1Cl <':111 
J:cr~G0 01 c010fno1 opples..:.lon. 
1111.> 
l/doJ Ull-
_ 
f'orr,unnt c 1y cOClLrElry tv Lile :int er e:Jt.::· of [,Oile l l' GnCl1ll1en, /]11(( 
c-Bo 
~~rQ nc 0 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
-
" 
L,'r:1,lC(;, t.O hj jOi1l tile co.Loni:.: i.:,: 
ii ;l 'v'\.~ Jo n .; el,'ilc\:]C.ll,-:cl tile tru~h on 
lruj(\Cl!iJl~I, inrJt.;eucl (IC' ':ll r,lc:'J.'in.; into P (X 'cl)~'l)le no, ~c.t .. i:.::. tj:i.CJ l l~
, 
l'(:x!l':':..'u to Oll o ... ;Grc8::; jv ',; i!l \;:-<, ioll, 'ivi tIl :..111 the muunD 
<.:; l.; tho 
C (', ': (. Il' 
('I' '.:· c cl ,crn In Lion. 
~'"o l'covor, ,[H:lvillC 
llt; r:JI( ::, d ''':,~ 
:~L(J 
,)r i[;i~) 11 tilOL til(; Victll: :r:l'.;sC ure 
';;j ~~JliI1 L; f(l-:;" u 
rr~tlJl'll of the 
:;:'~I' '':'':Jl ch rul e ,Vii 8y ob t" i i.l.l:U , 
l' ir ~~ t l'ro:n 
·tTl ri :r3t-il~:i.sll cO:it,r,snu-i n--
,~'; (Il, 1',l.t'';U;t; 
}\~_:;j [l , 
LiItm frem Lon<lo.l.l, n tnc:i.t r t:Jco!:;ni ti ()tl 0(' 
til\~i r 
~,;ov"; l' e i C ll toy und ~l(lr.li n i:: tnl t. i V'~ res ~)o llf)i i)il ity O;j f::II' a s 
~ou t ll 
l[iu\.;1[1[;1 is c()lld c l'n(~d. 
The iJr:i.t:ish Guve to undcI'st.Jn<l tht t,ltc;y 
(l;J d 
~l, ~ rc c d to th:i.s on tIw grol.l.11d 
thu~ the r ecstubli:;ili,j':2nI,6f 
[1'1' en c li udrn ini s t.rD t i OJl 0110 I cell:3 C(ill c n tol y , of 14'1' <:1 nc 0-V i (~tniJm'3 s e 
cul lu bol'l1tiotl i:'ioulu h':-;l p til :;ra to speed np the <l omobilizntion, 
(Illd 
t.tl':; cl:i::;(Jrr,t8[J1Cnt of the 
J ' ;.iJ'Ullf~ . :;
''- . 
nut SUb;:iC (l'-I'-mt ()v'':;:lLs 
,d.ll proY" ,; tile fnllo c ,Y o f til ::': 
url~ ll'll '; nt.. 
'.1.'t1(' Y,' twlc V1 E; t.Ju :nl~se 
n:xt ioTl 
1'0' ) ',~ up Os one :nDll 
~' :_;~) iu:. ;t~l",mr.li. u-.'l".-],s;;ion . 
Tlv:; f irst 
stre::f:t- !211ipinC 1iJIlicll \'.'uo l Cl I.ll1ch c:cl by t.lt'ci/r ·: Ilcll in the 31:1011 
llU lll'fi Cd.' 
0eptr~:-cl bcr ?3r<l [;00 11 
dcvt.:J.o~" )d :into r e i}1 IJnu Ol\ 'Ullized 
V;~ll'I',:n'C in ·.,','il :iCll 10s;-; (;;:; or o llC]V,~T on.boLll s iues . 
Tile brinc;iIlG 
ii.1 of .l.t'J.' cll ch :i jj!)ol'LlJnL r c:illforcl;!,llcnt.;.s 'on borJl'd of t.i.le :i.OSt 
1')\1',;(:1'1'u1 of 
tll(~ir r C:l\:j:Li1:in.::; 
w: :;r: :l d.p~; will '~Aten<l ti'te Vial' zone 
f[jl't.il'_l'. 
iIi:; Iiturclel'OIlS fir:llting i:3 [3t}J.l g()i~l G on in In<lon';:-.; io, 
C!lld 
fJ:-, 
s;:.lV~J,-;C acts on tip:! 1<1rt of irenCI1111Cll are r eported 0vory 
c1LlY, 
V.C 
:ILly eX Ll cet th e fl;Jrill ;::: up of 0 Cenernl conf.1J)cn: tion in 
tJJt ~ 
.i.i'~'l r- ,~r:l.s t. 
,)1.f;L it, i_s, tjlc :~ J.ju· ; l,~ ~ .. i_ 2::'-
,.~( IJ _L1L'::!0 t. :H-W,l 
oaJ.1Q_.i~ _Liii l;!1Cd i-
BtC :ult. crfcl ":!':)l1Ce . 
J.\1'.; 
CG c·\ I,l .L :::II 'l' cnt of the GODsult r ... tlVE.) COJi]-
-mlSoi'n for t .lle 
.l."ar--" , 0~)t. lie :,; 
i) '-; ( 11 
CJlt.~lU:::;i:J,'}ticolly 1f;clcomcd ht.;r>J 
os tile: first effective st';.iJ \:;ow8ru3 [I ll equ i table 8e ttl e:;lent of 
the p Clldin0 problems . 
Thc pcoplo or Vi 'jtrwtrl , -nbicll only osles 
for full ia epcn<lenc e and for t .l1C r espec t of trutlJ onci just ic e , 
. p u ts b ef ore your ~xc el l oncy our f ollov: 1ng c1 esiderata: 
10 -
the South vietll.om inc j_,.\cnt should be di scussed a t 
tbo first meetinc; of the lionsul 'I,:I'Li ve Corn:-nbsion for the li'sr-
:e;a s t j 
20 - VietnnmeSt; dellgDtes should be admitted to stote the 
views of the Vi etnnrnese Govr;rllln:mt; 
30 
Jill Inquiry Commi o[;i.uJl sllOuld be sent to 00uth Viet1l8 mj 
40 - the full independ ence of Vietnam should be recoGnized 
by the United Notions. 
I avail myself of this opportnni ty to send your -4,'-{ce11ency 
my b ect vdshes. 
HElsp ectfully, 
Presid ent EO CHI l'.1If~H 
pel s · 
C-81 
--~:~.<-" -:' 
...... 
..-
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.' 
; ; : l,· ·~l
[ ); ·
l
l~"
· 
11'_) " 
~; !' j 
"' ~
' '';~
1 ) :\.
1.,
( :1
: 
f l () . 
~': \ 
, ju l.r) ,.l .. ": t; ,.'i · ':l' 
~>1, 1:" ! ~_i 
:--nJil1 
;:U ! lIJlill i' ~ 
Division of Overseos ACCeira, 
l·'irot. .J'ront jll'rny, 
HDllOi ', Octobcr 22, 1945. 
TIle Horwrob1e 
L ; inistr2 :t~ ell t en. 
8ir: 
I hov u the honor to r eport tiwl; 811 tilc officials ond 
.rc-i0l)1 ~ 1)8 well 3S tItc! voriou:.=; i'L1.rLi es ond factions tllrOU l:~i1-
out In(l Oc iJi na hove b C' .. m llIl Onitlluu:)ly unl ted. 
I 11[-1ve bC ,;Il 
O :"l' ODC L1S d by i ILl'. HU Chih··;ninG,Ci:lo i;r::llon of the TrovisionDl 
Go', (:rn(n ( 'n t. of Indoch i 1111, und 1';1'. YUAH YunC- j ui, WIIO Wb 8 
r o r l ~lc rly ~Jnpcror rno '1.'0 of jJ.nno.m, wi th the rcquCfJt th:Jt. 
OIT f.1n_CmE'nts he m[l(lC \\11cr ooy they may be secl'c)tly conductsd 
to Chun :.. : kinL~ 1.0 c811 on yon Emd to be introduced to His 
i!;xcellency ChairmDll Chicl1lC ot nn in,>=,-':'.-:.:j.cw. 
~\ ." 
~;\ith your 8l?proval, I rcspGctfully rC'~uest thQt an 
eil'plon c be sent to IndoGl1i no 
ir;,~ordel~ thG t I ,may BC CO(flr-~:my~r'-- -:::'-:: __ - -=-,=, 
·i"essrs. lIu ond YU[1I\ on th eir t f-{..p:' l;o 
Chl1.r=::r\~~_ns. 
'l'1lf:~ joTi:1.t 
letter from L:cssrs. Hu and Yuan 
~LS tr an !3nt:L tt. :: : d~~ · -:-·:;-.... ith. 
Your in:3t;r;nct.:iolls arc rc cl..uested for my guidancc iI} the 
premises. 
. pels 
r . 
• 'I 
I h3ve the 1101101' t o be, Sir, 
I 
. I 
I. 
Your obedient servant, 
(sC8led) HSIAQ \VEH 
c-82 
I 
....... . 
" 
,~ . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. ~. ' \{ :·' . {.' ; :l;l·r·: 
U C' . 
:') 
I..() .! f;:.: [1·.I_· ';h 11."
. 
;'jr: ,1"1' ···1 
·_ , · :.t/ 'l "~ I' :';"1 
l 'J/Li 
• '.1" . 11 I "I: ' ! ,. \ i f II ~ 
r , t") 
C, l.J , 
Hi 8 
.c;XC c 1.1. f;l1CY 
Clwil'lI;Dll Chione 
l ~cli-shck, 
Carl~ of ;',iinistcr Cllen. 
I 
I 
i 
J~;;{ C ('; 11 ell C y : 
I 
i 
I 
Je hove 
LjJ(~ 1101101' to 3t~. l tl; thGt WE! 
- 1m 
Chih-min (~
, 
'Clwirilinn of t;ll~: l'rov:li::::i.OllOl G(lVt~~.l:nll;unt of' th8 lJ erno ()l'n f,i() 
i-~r.; 11l.l U LlC 0 rInd (Ichi n o , 
f-JlHl H i c.;h ;\d v i nell' 
~{U l\N yune; - ;j 1.11 
(fonler hnpcror ruo Tu) -
dec;i:rc to j)l'occcc1 Lo C11lJ.n:.:kinc; 
to VGY our r 08~")c ctG to your .c.';-ccellcncy 011<.1 to coLt on 
Li!d.ntur Ch ' en. 
If th:i.s mee ts Wi:r,Ft :rou.r npiH'ovrJl , Wt) 
shull [Jpprcci3tc youx' 
b
'=in~; c ooel enouGh Lo favor us vvith 
fl I'Lj)}Y. 
pds 
r . " 
we hewe the honor to be, Your i..'x:c e 11 ency, . 
Your 0 betJ.l.eul, /5 orvcln ts, 
Hll CEDI -I·.l:Um 
1-0 hN 11JNG- JlJ I 
c-83 
' ~1"
---~ ' -: ..... 
!, \ 
. _ . _ . .l 
! 
.---'~-. I 
------ ; -:.. .. 
• 
t 
c C. .:.'1 
~-. VI I 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1 '-:( ') 
. l.... , ... ,.' 
iICTION: ,:;;2, Cl .. 
~--. 
"--v" 
I . ~ 
INFO: 
S 
U 
c 
" E:UR 
FE 
Fe 
" ~Y) • • , 
-.~~~ 
nCS-1835-K 
. 
This tEIE2rn~ Dust be 
ClosEly paraphrasEd bE-
forE bEine co~~unic~tEd 
D8.tEd l';OV EnIJE1" 8, 1 9~ 5 
,.~r: ' (~,;,/. ;. 
to o..njTOilE. 
(S'::CI'lC:T) 
of StC.tE, 
r!nshinston. 
19~8, j,·'OV cl:b Er 8, G p.n. 
ThErE follo~s sub3 t ~ncE of lEtt Er ~ddrESSEd to 
PrEsidE:1t Trm1al1 by Fo-Cil.i-ilinh v/ho signs QS HprEsi-
c c 
....... 
C. EDt ' of Prov is innl ('OV Ern" EDt of REpublic of VI E'c ~.'_;:: ;:)~~'~~!;~;:' ;;::C-:; 
~T!'\''''~I H, 
L.Et.tEY' " JP S f.'l',1E"'I, to C·"-r.nEl',"'. l 
L"!."'11~-r~.1' "1"(1
' 
r I,; 'y--:.·L': 
-
. (. ... ~ ~
. 
"''-
'iI 
'-"'" 
:.... 
\I 
i.J 
r.l 
, (,...;,. .... 
L· CJ - .... ~ 
'-~!.J'"-
; 
"
'\', ; l-'-
t..... 
.. 
( -
\ 
~ -
\.1 -,; , '6" < ... :~ 
1""O_Y'~i2 rdEd to· .. Er.~b 
.. 8. Ss\~ throu.r::h -.'J-. SO 
: Y'~\T C1'l .... '1,, ~ls · < 
.';", '-" 
• 
r 
.... 
_
, 
_ 
.. -
_. 1.] 
J.. _O;"" ~!._ .. .. c:. 
...
. 
#. 
I( -...
. _,- u
r 
,.' 
" .\ 
"-. ~ "( . . • ', . ' . I) 
--' 
(Embns sy'" ~820 Oct o\,,-r:._~? to DEpart!OEnt l' EpEat EC . . t:-_:)J' ('f 
Po..ris).. 
, 
/ 
I 0ish to GiVE folloTIinc 
I 
infol'1.12. t ion CO~lC E:i'ning 
situ o..t ion of ViEt- I ~::"E!: 
(1) . rfh En In:;:)[m ES E C n!.1E to Indo-Chino. fro!': ;:; Ept-
I 
r. 
En'JEr ~9~O to SEpt:::r.!.0El" 
1'J~1 :-'2.'8..1CE, by :::'1'o'coco1 
Jul~.r 
. 1 
. 
, 
1941 end SE c rEt ni1it~ry Po.ct DEcEsbc::r 8, 1941, S8.V E 
-I 
U~j S OVEr Ei:;rlt -;;r o.nd t ool~ pos-i tion oppos Ed to .:'.lli ES (>
' 
On 
I 
I 
JD:DQrJESE 
. 
I 
i 
i 
c1ri V E I·fo rc!l 9, 
.... ~ -'-'-''';''
"''-
'; :", 
• • J . .... 
. •• .• '1 
" , 
" 
1945 FrEnch Eit::lzr 1'1E(1 or 
..... _------
c-84 
.1 
I 
I 
3 tH':;"" Enel. E1' Ed 
:.0;-
:.. , 
• •
• 1 
(:~.; 
\ 
....... '. 
. -
.", .' 
~:. 
-;-. 
-
-
J~CTIO:;;:' : 
s 
u 
C 
EUR 
FE 
FC 
Ci. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.~ .OJ ' ': 
, 
-, -. 
• L ,_ 
\
,,1 
in protective treaties March 1874 and June 1884 1 thus 
breE~king al~ _ ~~g~l and aClf.1inistratlve tics ':!ith peoplE: 
of Indo-ChinC'... 
Dei.1Ocratic rtepublic of Vlet-N2.fJ1 '!:J2.S 
set uP. August 19, 1945 after independence of cntite 
country Ivas \'mested froEl Japancse~" After JapC'..Dcse 
surrender, while Viet-Nam Provisional Governuent in 
cC7-PQcity of' an independent Government i'iElS cc.rrj·i:1[:; 
out C'.. 
b~ilding-up pro~r&m in confor~ity with AtlC'..ntic 
ana San Francisco Charters, French, ignoring del-
\ 
. 
" 
lberately all peqce treaties concluded by United 
Nations C'..t end of ~\:or1d Vier ~Il attE;,ckeG. us treacher-
ously in i'i2igon, SeptS1.1oer 23 1 e.nd e ..... re }lle.nning e. 
~:J2r 
of aggression agC'..inst Viet-Nan. 
(Sent to Depart~ent 
repeated to ParisJ~ 
(2) . P~ople of Viet-Nc.::1 ~c ~;Jilli!18 cooperate with' 
having suffer8~ so severely under direct domination of 
-::i'rpn' .... h 
.... ~(1 "" 'lch ""o""'e 
fro[~ h..,'Y'> · ..... l· n .. r"L',~dC'\ 
:"".;.1 
'Mr·_Y',c,nc_;""_· ~'ll' ~~r1 
... 
" 
v_ 
Clll 
I.L '_ . 
_ 
Jl.,j, 
!I uc ..... bC'-
I 
~ v 
u 
_
, .. 
..... _ 
JD . .pU:1. in:. 
SECRET 
.c-85 
t 
{ 
, ( 
(: 
( 
I--
" 
--
'=:: 
~ 
~ 
~: 
'j. 
<-: 
'e" i' 
\: 
\ "-t 
.... _\ 
r .... · 
,J 
~) 
_.,! 
.. ~ 
- ' :-' 
.~:. 
~} 
.. l 
1") 
-, 
r...l 
-'" 
~c 
~)) 
Y---
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
-3- #1948, November 8, 6 p.m. from Chungking via Navy 
Japan in 1941, are determined never to permit French to return to 
Indo China. 
If French troops coming ~ither from China where they 
fled during Japanese occupation of Indo-China or from other places 
put foot on any part of Viet-Namese territory the people of Viet-Nam 
are determined to fight them under any circumstances. 
(3) 
If, therefore, disorder, bloodshed or general conflagration 
due to causes mentioned above in paragraph (2) break out in Far 
Eastern Asia entire responsibility must be imputed to French. 
(End 
substance letter). 
Identical message from Ho-Chi-Min addressed to Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-Shek has also been received by same army channels. 
Effibassy will not deliver message to Gimo unless so directed by 
Department. 
ROBERI'SON 
JMS 
c-86 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I 
c' 
. i:::::t:J j.:.~~~~:ri\:·lE:;>~~1 · 
.... 
~ -' ;r t::.' 
S'"(j~T l:: 
"';,r-
r· 
l' c. ·~ u 
DC/L-I( 
JJ, ... ·l 
'0~ 
10.1 
-- - .~.: .~ .. <. .. .:...' .. . . 
~. 
m:~S~·5l6 ",0 
This tElEgram must' bt 
6loSEly par~phrasEd
· bE­
forE bEin~ ~on nmnicntEd 
to anyonE G 
(SC:CHET) 
SEcrEtary of St~tE, 
WashinG t 011 c 
2026, Hov 23 j 
{ 
P Q 1',1 o. 
" 
f 
:,:., ";; ; 
. \. ... 
~/ 
~ ... 
, L 
;
~ . 
t . 
'" . ' 
BE 1 ov·, is' giv En s1.1bstanc E of idEnt ic ['..l 
c0L1.r.1LmicQtions 
C· 
Di~Ector GEnEral of 
UiTHRA; 
c/! 
GEn Eral GQIlQShE I' end forr.[ard Ed to t::nlbQ3 s'Y 
t:'l.. ~'()Ll:; h GS 
.
. 
-.. ' ~ 
D. C ·":-:' ;'1' ~/ ",-:-,< ,~" .:,:. / j /- "t" v: .::~ 
Army channEls. (Ernbassy fs 1952 , Nov ~ to DEpt! ~EPEQtEd to 
-.x t:..-=:: 
~:~ .. t:;'./ :.;; , .. :'7-
,,~, 
Paris) : 
(' 
·1 vJish to invitE QttEntiOri of 'J"Ol1I' ':'--CE11 c·....., 
i -
1.'01' 
y 
~-'\. 
.- -
.. :' C -l 
• 
[-;trict1'y' humanitc.riall 'Y>E!1"'O"'S to foIl O\'i-~ iv
' 
' · l.-i~··L _., 
_ 
..:.. 
<.. .. ~ 
.LJ 
-'--
.l.. lG 
_ . .. L~ Lt tJ t..~ 0 
million ViEtnnmEsE diEd of sto..rvo..tion d1.1l'inC --Ylintcl' 
t 
of 
19~1 and spring 19~5 bECQUSE of stcrv~tion policy of 
FrEnch y;ho SEiZEd c.nd stored until it r ott Ed 
~ . ll c~vQil-
'. 
, 1 
'
. 
( ("l 
• 
0.0 E I'lee: 
..:.lEDt DEpt; 
of 
. \ 
..... .'/ 
•• ~, I 
.J; I '.-;:..' • 
. • -
•
• , ' •.• 
SECHE"l' 
• 
\ .... j 
/1.. -;) 
. ~I 
c-87 
, 
: i '. 
:.. .: --:- ;.-. 
~
" 
., 
I', 
_ •
• - • 
.. -.-. --' '. ' -.. 
. 
!'.'. , '" 
• 
. _-....] 
c c 
~ · ·l 
I, 
-,-' 
I·; » 
() 
'-. 
f0 
Vi 
h. 
-.J"-
01 
. " , 
I .. ... 
' -
SECRET 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
inerED.S ES numbEr of pc,:'sons v/llo must bE fEd with stoeles 
0.11" Enoy not s uffie i Ent:> 
£ 
.... lso tr'o.ns port of ric c from 
Coehinchino. is madE inpossib1E by conflict provokEd' by 
FrEncho 
Uany pEoplE arE sto.rvinc; and c8.suo.1tL=.:s inCl'E2.SE 
EVEry day~ 
EVErythinG possib~E hD.s bEEn donE 
un~Er thESE 
cil'cumstancES by Provisional GovEr;JmEnt of Vi Etncll;l 
REpublic 0 
UnlEss grEa'c vio!'1d pOVlErs 2,nd intErnQt:Lonc(~ 
rEliEf organiL:ations bring us imr.1 Edi2,tE [lSSistQl1CE \!E 
.. 
fQCE imminEnt cat2.strophEc 
E~CE11Ency, thErEforE, for 2,ny availablE 2,SSistnllcEo' 
I 
rEquEst your ExcEllEncy to o.CCEpt my hEartfElt and antici~ 
patEd thanks in namE of my pEoplEo 
ROBERrl'SON 
rIFS 
SEcn:::T 
'. 
/ 
c-BB 
, . 
I . 
., 
,1 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
--
THE FOr, F:i GN SErIVICC 
; " ': {' 
. 
1 ' 1 '. 
I l, J',! "
.1 : 
or: THE 
,:;';:,\! f;)~}q (JNiTCD ST/\Tes o'r J\MCWCA 
Subjoot: 
Trn.J1 8m1 t tnl o:~ co·o:i.':! n 
fr'-1m 
~~h0 
Il;::i.'o -.;iolo n'~ll 
R09Ubl1c 0:1 Vlo'cn:J.nr1 e 
', ,' . 7 l 1-:-1>' 
.'~ . 
of COr.) ll1f m i (;.:( t 1 on.G 
Government of the 
Tho ChD.rgO cl. ' Af:\'n.L."8Cl 
noi.~ j:;0.8 
~';>rJ h')tlor to 1'0.1'01. ... 
to rccr.nJc tolO£;:'Oi113 fro!i1 -.:;110 
I~:J1\::Cl.::1::,~i i'nC;;J.i:'<'LJn3 In(~.o­
chinn.. anel 
Jco tr'ansml t 
co1J~~or. o:~ '1;:.'}';,,':o 
CC':~ i 'l'.; .;-t1.c2.tl onr; 
from Prcoic1ont Eo 
Chl~JI!:1.i'11.4 of tl:Q "/;'1':)v:u:Li.on.::11 C,)v(!:cn-
mont; of ~~ho Rcpubl:lo of. V.l.c~;i1 .:l. i1rl" 
'.21v::· [J; C(lftir,lu,nj.c.'l.tionr. 
\ 
\ , 
Hero cl811 vorr;r} to G0no1',':1.1 G'tll[l.C;h(!J.' r Un\ tc(l. Stn,t e Q Arnr:/, 
her.c1 of th0. Chln0.3c Comb8.t Ll·:l.inon C1~"O!.F) 1'J1th ~Cll0 
Cbln8GO foreoo in North Il.vl.ochln 'l" nncl 
'~~():;";·i(1.rdod to the 
Eli1bacr,3') throL1Gh Unltc(l ntn~; (~n /lXjJi~' cJ}:l.nnJ)lo., 
'\ 
Tho comrnunlcl1tlbn for Gonc~\>;llJ.r,o:i. iil() C.h1nnc; Kn.1-obo% 
lillI, notb0. rl()llvO:t'oll. to 11.1.111 by t ho ;';;r;,'i,:n. f1 oy unlaoe GO 
instructed by the Dopnrtmout. 
Enclosures: a/~ I- . 
!Copy of lp.t tcr froT:) ?ro ~ _1.d('n·:; :lIo Cl11-mlnh, 
Vietnmll Del11ocl'o,1;ic Fln.:Jubl1c '1;0 DCCr07.;Ory of 
Gtnte datc<l }iov(~Jill) l')r 1, l~H[) .. 
Copy of telc[,X'nli1 
~;() GGl1cT2..11Go1mo ChianG 
Kal-r,hck c1nt;crl 
O()~;ObC," 28, 1':)<1:5. 
iCOPY of telogram to 8ocrot~ry of stnto, unQated. 
nn(l hoctoe::rn"Jl-!-·to th8 Don.J.!..'tmont., 
En~a8ny, Pnr18, t~roa~ch bC93rtmont 
~.1 
_ ..... 
~ ") 
nL8;11Yth~ cnm 
r,'lJ.o 
c-89 
I ~
. ; 
.. _ i 
'\ " 
- ' 
"-. 
• 
I 
, 
l 
i
" 
J - ~' -
• 
.-- :-~ 
, 
\ 
I , 
"I ~ ., .,~ •• 
. \ 
... ~ - . 
_ .... .. 
CO 
ell 
(I) 
" 0 
"-
i 
II) 
e)) 
.~, 
IJI 
o 
( " J, 
'-.. 
, ., .. ,\ 
, \ 
I I 
I 
[. 
, 
~ 
, 
i 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
( "'( .... 11 
)";'r" 1) ""'[1'/ 
C)lLl1 ..... {.,,·i~. 1
1
1 .·. _ I; : ,·I. n;·1 
• 
.~ ./
. 
., ;,
. ~ " 
' . 
, 
< I 
.. 
~) 
i I 
" 
~ 
~ 
, 
Pre "'.~~ ~~c;:~f;'~lJ~~~_ ,~L;1"O v~ 01 nn" 1. Core ·,""nen t a 
f V 1 c t-lI'_", 
I 
I' A Itft 
~~C;;~~;Cl~~Q~~~~';~~~nJ~~l~ ,~r~ ;'i~ : ':jt~:~no:;: tIlt) U.\li to:;t [ltnt0o of Amcr:lca 
~F i' 
i1rlnh:i!lc;~on, D.0. 
I I r' 
f'xeeUonc>', 
'--- . 
~ 
-- -.. 
"'--. 
I 
On boh':-ll:l' of tho V:'I.O'tl1 ( " l r. IIJ.~;I.l.:.:'.~; l 1\!~1C1001r:J. tlon, I bee; to o;~}Jl' ·,)IJ!J ; 
tho dcnlro of thl.'1 A[1(Jnc.L:'.;;lon "'v e) contt to tho Unl'coc1 81;:;l.tn[J 0:1:' 
J\l!I,:)plclt n. c1 1')lq;n'clon of r::.boq~; f.i.:c"~~r V.lJ:ltnam you'c118 '\'71-;;11 n. vi8'.{ 
to ont[lbJ,1chlnc; frlnn:l1y Cq~l/~t:·. ~.'al ro1 :'). ~.;:i.on8 \11'cl1 the Arn'-)~~l1enn 
you'ch on tho ono h~u1(1, .... '11el 
O·1.:;:,:,,'Y),"):3 0'1 :;:'U).".:;1181" s"'i:;udior.; :'.n 
EnGinoorinG, Agriculturo G1 well ~~ oth0~ l1u0n o~ apoclnl-
lr;;ltlon on 
"~118 othol"o 
Tho dor.ix'o vrh1011 I nr.1 
eDnVi1.yJ.llL~ 'Lo ;YOlr'.:' 
;;;:~0011()ney h~8 berm 
f);<pro n and to me by nIl tho Vi o".;nnr:1 sI131nt:;o:r'o, Lauycl"o, j?ro-
f00f101'D ,an Holl nn other l"t')pJ."'o,srHlto.t:i.V(l[J 01:" OUP lntel11B'ol1toln 
Hhom I bel.vo C rjji10 [lex'onn. 
.. 
Thoy havo beon Hl1 thf)G0 ;Y08.J:'O 1\.00.n1:1 
lntf~J.'ootol1 in thln G;) 
Amor.'l.co.l1 flm1 flrl.:cnnotly (l.Cr. :b'(lliQ to G0'C 
in~o tOllch ~'ll th tho. 
Amor1cnn pooplo whooo fino nt~nd fo~ thn noblo i1cul0 of 
lnterna tional Justic!') n.n.d E~ArnnJ.t;r, nnd 1:111030 rnoc1m"'n t f)011nl('[11 
o.chie'Temcnt 0 lla vo so stronc;ly [tPPtJ~I.J.(;t1 to tl1cm. 
t 
I sincerely ",10J.1 tllat thin pIc.n ~!JOU}.f1. be i".:tVOl"ocl. 1)y you~ 
anproba tlon nnd [ts EJloJcnnco and avail my noli' of thin Oppol"'t~mi ty 
~ 
11 
b 
J-
., 
to exproDs to your Exeo . enoy my 
03~ W~8Don. 
' 
President Ho ... CHI-LINH 
(oiGnoc1) HochlHlnh 
C-90 
I 
. J 
• J 
I 
I ! 
, 
I 
~'. 
I 
.1 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
En clo :-mr0 (0 .. 2 to c1n(lnn~:(~h 11 0 . 
C· ~.I') d::1.t ,y1 lim/()Jnor")r 21), 
19 /~ 5 
11' 0 1 \ r-::1,\ho'1rJn~' J 
011' .. 1\1r;',· j.1 :;' • . 
JIOClurAJ:NII Prco:1.dont of rI10V.T.:iI a nl\JJ GOV .i ~m ·jj·;~wr 0J:' VIl'::'l'Nt\iI 
nEPUDLIO 
to H'1'l."Iohnll Ci]IANG Kill 
0Il1~ !( J(n,:1l'0' :LC of C ~ TJ: ~:f\. 
" 
.. ...... -.. 
- - ~ ..... 
~
"- -- ._. __ ._------.--
Xn i;hn n;,T'1O of the Prn irJfI:),rlj'1,j '.l 
(}oV01'nrncnt 0:l V:\c1;n[1.In 
nr.plJbllc \'70 c};lpb.r.1.t;j.cul1.'i 
n l ")':; ';;) '~ 
::r. C;::l i nf' ~~ 1J.8() of J;:tp~J.ncc o 
troop1 by 
Brl'~lGh Il1I1J.:I.il 
::i.;:",j n~' Ulh.1r. :;." 
CO~l\ ) ;l!J.n .J of Gcnor.J.l 
erne-oJ :Jnrl by FJ."I r.nch [1 ~ :' I !q tlI1/tf) ',' cOinT,::1.l1c1 of G'Jnr.r,l.l L0cl <) rc 
in the: x'0.prnn nion of VJJ ~ 1;:::t ·:-: !1t :l :i ':; n:.l;jion;J,l 
lib()~,"I.:l'clon movomont 
1n Sou.th Inc10r.ll~Lnf:l 
~:V ()~' .I 
Un{lcp pretenco 0:2 111r..':1,:cj;\.'l;-J-!:; tl-;.c 
tTr=J.~.)o. n08o G::moX'nln 
G "'coy 
"'11(~ T""'01(:'I1'C 
CJ~
·tro
l )"i"'-:) c~L 
-) ': ' )" '-''''''--' '--"Ico')'" .... }) .. h 
.... 
1'l,.-1,. 
,; 
u , 
t 
J...J'.;J
' , 
• . 
"
, 
I
" 
•• tt." . 
"'
1 .. .: 
I. U
.V , ' "", 
• .J .\,.J 
~.J 
'"' 
..J. .... OU[; OUlI 
8ou~; h Vio 'cn::li1l provine,)!"; ['.n Iln.nc;u.').::·'-J, .» 
D:;'''I1'c18h Inc1:l.o.n 
and 11'ronch troopn \·T:l.'i;h v:i.oi'T 
~;I) roo:}t ~\bl:\.ohil1 G F:r>ench 
domlnn tion ovor 10(19°1110;:\ nto}) ~ 
7110 Vlctnll.ll1o [lo pcoplf'J £Jnv.i..nc 
J:'u~~ .bJ.()o::; ly fOUGht D.;:;ainnt 
Jllp,:mOG8 f'f:1.f)oln m and he1.11ing 
I n :JJ~ oo"Ij.:lbllGhc;c1 clomo c:i"la t1c 
ro~lm8 throu~hout ito count~y fools Groat oat indignation 
~. n pro [.onco of 8uch un.] u r;1;lLt'l.:)}.o b 8 h~.l.vloul'" on t he pU:i:'t of 
Britlsh ana French atop 
. Th0l"Elforc 1-TO ntroDGly npJ!3D.l to ['.ne1 
o8.~el.'ly roqu.oGt your 
Excellency to 
primo laauo order to ntop m~Aoacr o of a pf)oplo 
defending ito 10gltlm~te r1chto acco~c11nG to p~lnclpleo 
laid do-wn in Atlantic D.nc1 Dun Pj.'ancloco ch8.r'to:i. .... o 
socundo recognizo full indopendenco of Vietnam 
Rep'ublic final stop 
r' 
,. 
II 
Be r: ·,')p.c~'-"u' 1-' 
. \.o'!" 
IJJ. .1.." 
r;q CHI KlNH 
C-91 
li-p' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
SncJ.!) fliU'O to (1.n r.p0. tch nl)~ 8:-:10, 
r.1il1;~J.nny, 
Chlmr~l~l tlG~ 
of 8tatn 
D. c. 
" 
FHl' E::l.f'lt i'JO rOGX'n'tj lJ.bsnnGn of. 
V:ln.~;n ,::'.lilOr,() c101f'J[;·D.t.lon 
~ltop OW~ ,) 
. 
nnIn('G() peOj)}.f) Dtop J.i'.l'nnco 
uml.o:~' Gaven' O :j~ Bl'.l'liloh-Irv.Urm nn(l 
. 
violatod 0.11 pl'lnciplnn P:t"'ocJ.:l.lnt;(1. :l.:1 
/\.~Glan·c:i.c and Ca n Ii'ran·· 
month dcoplto bloody'opposltJol1 of jn~Lo-Indlan Fronoh ond 
Jo..pnnoco Troops ban prOOl3.:lElfd 
~;l1'3:Lr \1111 to live fi.."'8C and 
lnc10pendent under dem()c:r.'o.~~10 Gon rJt):'uction stop The V1o"t.:;namoGo 
I 
poop19 exproDoo8 s1noc:;.'0 1:.o;:)c 
~ch1.~ all :l:'-O!) nationn in i'iOrlcl. 
COmilk'1 carl"ylng out h1Gh 
::. ,~l . :;al o~ GGnor-ool ty and hum!J.n5.'~y 
I 
exproGElccl in PI'coldent Tl'unJ.8.n:o GPooch Co~);ua 1"ooo(;'n180 
I 
-
__ 
. . . 
I 
1nc1e'"I'cndence of Victno.m 1"Ol)ublic and P:l~'; a stop to ffi0rc1cl"ouO 
. ~ 
I 
~ 
. ---::--
~ 
.. ::---:------ ---
oonfl:1.ct lin South Vietnrun stop RcspectfullJ Hochl:r.rinh 
or' . 
~. 
., . 
4 . 
C-92 
*, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
c-O-p-y 
PEM-P 
Paraphrase before com-
municating to anyone. 
SECREI' 
Secretary of StatE7, 
Washington. 
281,Feb 13, 10 a.m. 
DEPARTMENT OF STATE 
Incoming Telegram 
Chungking via War 
Dated February 13, 1946 
Rec ~d 6: 18 a.m., 14th . 
There follows substance of l etter dated Jan 18, 1946 addressed 
to President Truman by Ho Chi-Minh just received by Embassy through 
US Army channels: 
he extends congratulations to President on occasion 
of opening of first Assembly of United Nations in London, and on efforts 
of American Govt to maintain peace and security throughout world. 
EMBTEL 1948 Nov 8, 6 p.m. 
, 
Since peace is indivisible and Far East is receiving particular 
consideration by appointment of General Marshall as Special Representa-
tive in China, he believes it his duty to inform President of develop-
ments in Indochina and consequences for world security of French aggression. 
Sent Dept as 281 repeated Paris as 1. 
In 1941 Vietnam rose up to oppose Japanese Fascism and sided with 
t 
Allies. After Japan surrendered a provisional government vTaS set up 
to eradicate Fascism in Vietnam and restore order. 
Supported by whole 
nation, it carried out a democratic program, and ~estored order and 
. 
discipline. 
Under difficult circumstances general elections for national 
Congress were held on Jan 6, 1946. 
Ninety percent of the nine million 
electors voted. 
French colonialists on contrary surrendered to Japan 
in Sept 1941 and for four years cooperation with Japanese against the 
Allies and in oppression of Vietnam. 
By a second surrender March 9, 
1945, five months before Japanese defeat, French lost all right and control 
in Indochina . 
French attacked popuJ_ation of Saigon on Sept 23, 1945 while Vietnam 
Democratic Republic was endeavoring to carry out reconstruction program. 
It was followed by systematic destruction and murderous warfare. 
Each 
day brings new reports of looting, violence, assassination of civilians, 
and indiscriminate bombing of non-strategical places by military planes. 
It is French intention to .invade entire country and reestablish their 
. domination. 
SECRET 
C-O-p-y 
C-93 
C-O-p-y 
SECRET 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
#281) Feb 13) 10 a.m.) from Chungking via War 
After "offer of interference (interventio~ ?)" made by Mr. John 
Carter Vincent) people of Vietnam enthusiastically welcomed President 
Truman's address of October 28) 1945 in which he set forth the principles 
of self-determination and equality of status laid dovm in Atlantic and 
San Francisco Charters. 
Since then) French have greatly increased their 
fighting forces with result that millions will suffer) thousands will 
die and invaluable properties will be destroyed unless United States 
intervenes to stop bloodshed and unlawful aggression. 
On behalf of people and Govt of Indochina) he requests President 's 
intervention for an immediate solution of Vietnamese issue. 
People of 
Vietnam earnestly hope that the great American Republic .Till help them 
achieve full j_ndependence and support them in their reconstruction work. 
. 
Thus) with assistance of China and UnitedStates J in capital and 
technique) Vietnam Republic will be able to contribute her share to 
building up world peace and prosperity. 
Another letter "I,as received addressed to General Marshall vrhich 
is identical .lith one addressed to President) except that opening para-
graph extends Ho Chi-Minh 's congratulations to General Marshall on his 
appointment to China and expressed conviction that an understanding of 
real situation in Vietnam can make some small contribution to task in 
China which confronts him. 
SMrrH 
Shown to WO 8:45 p.m. Feb 14. 
WTD 
SECRET 
C-O-p-y 
C-94 
I 
.' 
r B A 
~;'l ;'" n \':\ ~ 
;...'" 0-
~'U 
I
· \ b·U. l~l. u "'1L1~J:\"V 
-:- -
" _. 
Si'i 
#~';1!~ 
. ~ liS/. 
'1.'0 the rm,SIL't:t;'l' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I)()C-L\l' -
TV-DO 
(1.~:\LI-Pll(: C 
lil\:!Ol };',jEJ '"t(y I', 19'i,!]. 
.~ 
Fre siCOllt l. 0 Clil ... H iil, 
I-rov:i.'siol1.'l.l Gove r .cll,{.,rrL of 
VEj:n.'L,:. l ':'" oc t.> ' '' Tt ' 
l":"'~T ; ·' l T -' 
) .. , . -
.1I\ L1. .... 'v 
'.. ..... J,. 
L.,;1) ~.J..\j, 
li " :i 0 1 
of t },(] U;,! J L :;D S '.t"I T::~ S 01, !\,;'!-lIC:I, 
':, 1\ f, F I 
£'f G '1' 0 
~,!
, 
D. C • 
. fou g!-.t 
• 
of OUT fcllo· . .'-C G tmtr~)· Lc!i ~\.lld b~ the f:roi.lses LE\dc b::.r the .nlies ~t Y'\L'J."\, 
~' .... :~· .• C"I '"! r;"J... ", --1 
l·L-. ... ..,· ... o-+ 
~·1 • .... ' I ' .1 ... 
~..- , 
.J \..: \. , 
__.... 
• 
. C-95 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
nGOi'l.K,.GX[~O 
\' I (: T - :'\ ,\ ~1 
, . 
D(IC-L:\!, -- TV-DO 
S(') 
~-~. -
• 
0.1 J.n .. :i cnc1 to ti·.t: 
pledic~"
' S l.:>.ce b:: t:!C "l!ics d:..1ri!~G the ;orlc: .. nr . It 
\ 
d c cl qro.tio~! ) 
r\~cl 
:-:H ~! -cl,e 
ic'e~ lis'dc lofti".c sll and. f:e~el' oGitv cTc'rcs :,ed 
. 
.... 
'.
-
~ <; <: E' ' 1)1 ,. 
~~ ,
~ .. ..... / , 
Bnd J.f. DUilLS . 
, 0 "'0""'1.::] 
<-"Cl1"';"-" 
.:r+ 
J.' r._' . .,.. 
• . lJ·.8.<: +'r..:, 
~C " 1';.1.. 
. 
.1.., 
J 
t ' 
l:C ·y~n..ce· -C 
.:
.&. 
~;"--'.,i. .... IJ . :,
. 
~ v 
·v _
_ 
'" 
VJ. ~':: 
'-' 
11' ~P ~J.C _t ,,~," , or ":'.v 
J. '2~,~~-" 
:~ e 
Our Vh,t:t'1 r:: Fecr:lc, after so !:n.ny :,/G,"'.1'S of s poli'ltioTl "'.nd t 
litter to bri!l~ its 
s :.~ ll cO ~'1t rib '. .. rtic:l'i.;o ,'icrl(;··rec ol1s-cructio:'l. 
C-96 
. 
. -,. .. 
Si) 
Li~,:e the 
o 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
63316 B . NWD Date: 2011 
NND Project Number: NND 
. y. 
___________ I- • ..L. __ 
-
--=.~.- -----:---- -.- ... ---~-..... -
y 11~ T - :\ A \1 
D A :\ - C Ill: . C () :\ (; - 1\ ().\ 
D(>C-L\P -
TV-DO -
IL~:\II-l'll(:C 
J 
• 
COCPC!"'1.ClO:1 
C-97 
j 
! 
i 
f 
( . 
i~ , 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
C-O-p-y 
Viet-Nam Dan Chu Cong Hoa 
Chinh Phu Lam Thoi 
BO NGOAI GIAO 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM 
NO i E 
to the Governments of CHINA, UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA, UNION OF SOCIALIST SOVIETIC REPUBLICS 
and GREAT-BRITAIN. 
1.-
In 1940, the French in Indochina betrayed the Allies. 
They 
deliberately opened the doors of Indochina to the Japanese troops, signed 
with the latter a military, political and economical pact. 
The Nippo-
French cooperation policy, promoted and carried out with conviction and 
industry by JEAN PECOUX, former Governor-General of Indochina, was directed 
against the democratic movements inside Indochina and the Allied Nations 
outside. 
In fact the French put at the disposal of the Japanese forces 
the strategic bases, the economic and financial resources of Indochina. 
The technical services, especially the Indochinese Intelligence Service 
supplied the Japanese ",ith precious informations. 
The French airfields 
of GIAhA, TAYSONNHAT and others were handed over to the Japanese Air 
Forces, new metalled tracts were created "I-lith the collaboration of French 
technicians at TRAICUT, SONIA, PHUTHO, BACGIANG, PHANHHOA, PHUCTHO, PHUCYEN, 
VINHYEN. 
French colonialis launched violent propaganda campaigns against 
the Allies, and personal instructions were given by Governor-General Decoux 
to the IoP.P. (Information, Press, Propaganda Service) to that effect. 
The 
French aillninistration requisitioned considerable stocks of rice, thus 
starving a population of 20 million inhabitants among whom 2,000,000 died 
of famine and hardships, in the course of five months (from January to May 
1945), all this to feed the Japanese army in their Western and Southern 
operat ions. 
In the meanwhile, the Vietnamese nationalist parties made repeated 
appeals to the French for a joint action against the Japanese. 
These 
appeals were ignored by the French Government. 
On March 9, 1945, the French surrendered to the Japanese, after a sham 
fight which did not last a couple of days. 
Stocks of arms, ammunitions, 
fortifications, airfields, millions of liters of oil were handed over to 
the Japanese. 
This extraordinary carelessness denoted, if not complicity, 
at least an obvious goodi-lill on the part of the French. 
Thus, twice in 
the course of five years, the French have willingly helped the fascists 
in their fight against the democracies. 
Twice the French have willingly 
handed over to the' Japanese capital strategic, economical and technical 
advantages, for the prosecution of the Pacific Battle. 
11.-
In August 1945, the Japanese surrendered to the Allies. 
The 
popular forces of Vietnam vhich, since 1940, had made incessant attacks 
on the Japanese forces, and which had, in 1944, succeeded in creating a 
"Free Zone" in Northern Indochina, went down to conquer the capital-city 
and the governing rule. 
The population, fired with democratic aspirations 
C-O-P-Y 
C-98 
C-O-P-Y 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
and spirit) enthusiastically welcomed them and manifested their desire 
to maintain their unity for the .grandeur of the Fatherland once lost 
and now found again. 
On September 2) 1945) the Democratic Republic of 
Vietnam was solemnly proclaimed. 
Twice) first through Emperor Bao-Dai 
of the NGUYEN Dynasty) then) through the sqlemri proclamation of the new 
Government on Independence Day) the new State abrogated all the treaties 
formerly forced upon us by the French victors. 
The new Republic of Vietnam) 
thus legally instituted) is in the reconstruction of the world a factor of 
peace and progress. 
She is entitled for her safeguard to refer to the 
most sacred principles of SAN FRANCISCO and ATLANTIC Charters. 
She is 
based on and draws her strength from, the first of SUN YAT SEN's Three 
Principles and the second) fourth) sixth points of President TRUMAN's 
twelve-point declaration. 
111.-
But) on September 23) 1945) the French troops attacked Saigon) 
starting an invasion which is now in its fifth month. 
That invasion is 
menacing North Vietnam and French troops have begun to filter through our 
Chinese frontier. 
That aggression) carried on by an experienced and 
numerous army) fully equipped "lith the most recent inventions of modern 
warfare) has brought about the destruction of our tmms and villages, the 
assassination of our civilian population) the starving of a great part of 
our country. 
Untold atrocities have been committed, not as reprisals 
upon our guerrillas troops, but on \wmen and children and unarmed old 
people. 
These atrocHies are beyond imagination and beyond words) and 
remind one of the darkest ages: 
assault on the sanitary formations) on 
Red Cross personnel) bombing and machine-gunning of villages) raping of 
women) looting and indiscriminate pillaging of Vietnam and Chinese houses) 
etc ... Yet) despite the maltreatments of the civilian population) we have) 
for 5 long months, opposed a stubborn resistance) fought in the worst 
conditions) without food) mediGine and without clothings. 
And we shall 
carry on) sustained by our faith in international honour) and in our final 
victory. 
IV.-
~ the free zone of our national territory) especially in the 
area under Chinese control, North of the 16th parallel, our civilians have 
set out to work. 
The results of these five months of building-up work 
are most favourable and give rise to the brightest hopes. 
First of all) democracy has been established on solid foundations. 
On January 6 last) general elections' were organized with the greatest 
success. 
In a few days 400 representatives of the entire country will hold 
the first sr ssion of the Constituent National Assembly. 
A new administrative 
organization has replaced the old mandarinatesystem. 
The most unpopular 
taxes have been abolished. 
The anti-illiteracy campaign organized along 
efficient lines) has yielded unexpectedly optimistic results. 
The primary 
and secondary schools as well as the University have been reopened to more 
and more numerous students. 
Peace and order are restored and smoothly 
maintained. I 
I 
C-O-P-Y 
C-99 
c-O-p-y 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
In the economic field, the -situation is bettering every day. All 
the vexatory measures imposed by colonial planned economy have been 
abrogated. 
Commerce, production, the transformation and consummation 
of raw materials, once subjected to very strict regulations, are now 
operated on an entirely free basis. 
The shortage of rice, though still 
critical, has been relieved by the intensiv'e production of other food-
stuffs and the price of rice has been reduced some 40 % of its 1945 figures. 
Cereals, matches, salt, tobacco, once monopolized by speculators, are now 
offered on the normal markets at prices within reach of the common man. 
All public services have r e sumed their prewar activities, and the Viet-
namese staff under their Vietnamese Directors, are working with industry 
and efficacy. 
The communications have been reestablished, the dam system 
not only mended but still fortified. 
All this program was carried out while in the South, the French 
aggression has intens ified every day. 
The Vietnam people, despite the 
difficulties of the present, and the heavy heritage of five years of 
Nippo-French condominium, has shmrn the world what it is worth. 
Foreign 
correspondents and members of the Allies Missions vrho have come to the 
co"untry can bear witness to the new life in regenerated Vietnam, to our 
capacity to self-government, our desire to live free and independent, and 
our faith in the ATLANTIC and SAN FRANCISCO Charters. 
CONCWSION. -
For those reasons, we think it our duty to send this note to the Great 
Powers -- which had led the anti-fascist crusade to final victory and 
which had taken up the reconstruction of the world with a view to 
definitely outlawing war, oppression and exploitation on the one hand, 
misery, fear and injustice on the other. 
We request of these great 
,powers: 
a) 
To take all proper steps to stop by an urgent interference, the 
bloodshed that is taking place in South Vietnam, and to arrive at an 
urgent and fair settling of the Indochinese issue. 
We are confident in 
their mediation that may be given to us in this Pacific World a status 
worthy of a people that had fought and suffered for the democratic ideals. 
So doing, they will give a solid foundation to peace and security in this 
part of the world, and fulfill the hopes that the oppressed peoples had 
placed in them. 
While waiting with confidence for a positive measure 
from the Governments of WASHINGTON, MOSCOW, LONDON, and CHUNGKING, we 
have determined to. fight to our last drop of blood against the reestab-
lishment of French imperialism. 
b) 
To bring the Indochinese issue before the United Nations' Organiza-
tion. 
We only ask full independence, independence that is so far a fact, 
and that will enable us to cooperate with the other nations in the building-
up of a better world and lasting peace. 
Such aspirations are but legiti- . 
mate and the cause of world peace must be defended. 
Hanoi, February 18, 1946. 
C-O-p-y 
C-IOO 
c-o-p - y 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
SECRET 
HANOI, undated. 
LReceived February 27 - 11:45 a.m~ 
From Landon for Moffat and Culbertson. 
1. Sainteny stated that in conversation with Ho Chi Minh he offered 
Annamese complete independence within French community: 
That this meant 
that Annamese would have benefit of French advisers in every department of 
Government: 
That for instance Annamese Foreign Office would express its 
policies through French channels: 
That Annamese Army and War Ministry would 
be coordinated with French Army and War Ministry: 
And that Annamese if 
LIni! Finance and Commerce Ministries would heed French advisers as Annamese 
were inexpert in t~ese matters and might jeopardize {apparent garblil French 
investment. 
Sainteny said that Annamese in Cochin China would probably pre-
fer to remain French Colony rather come under northern Annamese Government. 
Ip this connection Ho Chi Minh said that French officials had conferred with 
him but that they were vague in their comments and had avoided the real 
issues of Annamese independence so that he had asked them to get specific 
terms from Paris which would make clear whether the French really offered 
Annamese independence or were merely using new language to describe usual 
French control Annamese affairs. 
2. 
Ho Chi Minh handed me two letters addressed to President of USA, 
China, Russia, and Britain, identical copies of which were stated to have 
been forwarded to other governments named. 
In two letters Ho Chi Minh re-
quests USA as one of United Nations to support idea of Annamese independence 
according to Philippines example, to examine the case of the Annamese, and 
to take steps necessary to maintenance of \-rorld peace which is being endangered 
by French efforts to reconquer Indochina. 
He asserts that Annamese will 
fight until United Nations interfere in support of Annamese independence. 
The petition addressed to major United Nations contains: 
a. 
Review of French relations with Japanese where French Indochina 
allegedly aided Japs: 
t 
b. 
Statement of establishment on 2 September 1945 of ~ovisional 
Government ofiT Democratic Republic of Viet Minh: 
c. 
Summary of French conquest of Co chin China begun 23 Sept 1945 
and still incomplete: 
d. 
Outline of accomplishments of Annamese GoverD~ent in Tonkin 
including popular elections, abolition of undesirable taxes, expansion of 
education and resumption as far as possible of normal economic activities: 
e. 
Request to four powers: (1) to intervene and stop the war in 
Indochina in order to mediate fair settlement and (2) to bring the Indochinese 
issue before the United Nations Organization. 
The petition ends with state-
ment that Annamese ask for full independence in fact and that in interim while 
awaiting UNO decision the Annamese will continue to fight the reestablishment 
of French imperialism. 
Letters and petition will be transmitted to Department 
soonest. 
C-10l 
C-O-p-y 
) 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
,.. :.' ... :J - ~.,:~ \ ~ 
., . 
• :; . ••• 
.;::1t- ..... r 
,,
-<I -
::::.: r-
SECIBT 
Subj ect : · .TrnIlsm:i.:tting Memorandlli'1l of 
Conversation with Ho Chi-minh. 
~}le Hon~r8. ble 
. 
:--
"'
" -:; 
--:..... 
-
I· . 
,1'he: ~)ecret8.ry of State ~ ' , . 
'. :r. 
d8.ted September 
"' ! , 
' ... 
1946. 
..... ~. 
... ' -" '-
with Ho Chi-mi!lh, President of. the'· Republic of Viet--Nam, 
" 
~
. 
, 
(" 
. 
~" 
t" 
... 
~nd to enclose. herewi th 8 .. melHorandum prepar~d by First 
.Secretary GeorGe J~ , Abbott cov~rine his c6nversatio~ 
" 
'.\
., . 
.' ... 
.". 'with lio Chi--minh later in the day" 
,.. 
Respectfully yours, 
t · 
• o 
C) 
" 
' ,' . CD 
" . . I 
o 
(I) 
d 
J 
L li 
.. -
- , 
,-
, ... 
, 
'.,. '\'! 
, ; 
i 
, 
. 
. i' 
/1 
.. 
. . ~. 
, , , 
," 
:~ 
'-. 
,,: , 
t ) 
~ . . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
Paris, September 12, ,1946. 
MEMORA:NDUM: 
''''''' . 
:. 
' 
" 
.' 
'.~ 
To: 
The Ambassador ' 
From: 
George M. Abbott 
'. 
~. 
, 
'\ 
'" 
,r 
In aocordanoe_with your request, I called last night 
on Ho Chi-minh and had a oonversatiol'l la,sting an hour. 
. 
. 
."' 
. 
Ho Chi-minh firsJe disoussed his 'contacts' with 
Americans dating back to his guerrilla warfare against ' 
the Japanese when ass and Army offioers were parachuted ' 
into his jungle headQuarters and culminating in his talk 
with you o 
He emphasized his admiration f'or the United 
States and the respect and affeotion for ~resident 
Roosevelt which i,'8 found even in the remote villages of 
his , oountry. 
He referred particularly to our policy 
towa.rD_ ,the .Philippines and pointed out that' it was only ' 
natural that his people, seeing an independent Philippines 
on one side and India about to gain its freedom on the ' 
o"ther, should expect France to understand -that similar 
measures for Indochina are inevitable 0 
, 
' 
, 'He then tool;:- up the question of hi's' Empposed ' c~in":"- ' 
munist conneotions 'which he l of course, denied o 
Ho 
, Ohi-minh pointed out that there are no Communist 
minis"ters in his government and that -the Viet-Ham con-
stitution opens 'with a guarantee of' personal liberties 
and the so-called ri8hts of' man and also guaran-bees 
the right to personal proper"tyo ' He admi"ts that there 
are Communists in imnam but claims that the Communist 
'Party as such dissolved itself, several mon'ths agoo ' 
The Fresident then outlined his" relations with -, 
, Franoe in general and the developments during the · 
' 
Fontainebleau Conferenoe in particularo 
He pointed out 
that all of' the various provisions of -the preliminary 
agreement of March 6, 1946, had been fulfilled except, 
the proviSions regarding a referendum in Coohinohina • 
The Viet .. ·Nam has its own governmen-t, its parliament, 
' 
ita army, and oontrols its finanoes. ' Regarding Coohin-
china, hm'vever, the French have been unwilling to set 
any da"be for the referendum or to agree ,to -'che proposal 
that a joint Viet-Nam-French commission should be named 
to arrange for and supervise the referendum. 
At the 
, 
I same time the French authorities in Indochina have not 
)_ ' respeoted the truce in Cochinohina and have oontinued 
I military operations against resiatanoe elements loyal 
to the Viet-Nama 
: ' 
Ho Chi-minh realizes 'that the present French 
' 
Government'is a provisional one and that until a Frenoh 
conotltution was adopted, the outlines of the French 
C-103 
, Union 
, . 
, . ~ . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Union established, and a permanent government ohosen, 
it wus difficult for French offioials to sien any p'3r&!l 
(" 
manen"t treaty or agreement '\'i'~h 'the Viet-Namo 
For that 
reaSon he was quite willing to adjourn the Fontainebleau 
Conference until January or thereabouts o 
.. , 
f' 
With regard to the modus vivendi whioh should have 
been signed September 10, 1946, Ho Chi-minh said -chat 
agre8rllents had been reached regarding Frenoh oconomic 
and cultural rlgats in the Viet-Nero, a cUS'(:ioms union 
for Indochina, and a co~non ourrenoy, although there 
had been some diffioulty over the drat'tine; sinoe he 
refused to allow the phras,) 
~'Indochineso }Pedcratiion" 
since it does not yet existe 
The French D however, h~V~ 
not aooepted "Cihe Viet-NaIll demand thati "democratio 
libert:'Les!1 be restored in Cochinchina o 
Ho Chi-minh 
explt-tinecl tl1at by. th5.s he meant freedom .ot the p1'ess, 
freedom of 8l:}semb+Y1 ?nd the rele~se or political 
'prisone~s. 
IJ.:he Vlell-l\J,-il? also inslsts -eJ;1at -they be per-
mi tted "(,0 sEmd a delega-eion to Cochinchl.na to make su.re 
• 
',0 
that the J!"rench Ii va Uy to thes e provisions and to co-
operate with tho French in bringing about the end of 
guerrilla warfare. 
He admitted that there are many 
UYJ.s\:"\V-ory elements ~:v i thin the resis'canee movement in 
/ ' . , 
'0 ' 
fI) 
I'" 
~~ 
• 
, 
I 
'. , 
0' 
.' 
. . 
, 
" 
. 
./ 
({ .. 
/ i 
, " 
Ij' 
.1 
. \ 
" 
.Coohinchina J bu.t arGued that if his :representatives 
could go through the cou:c.try and talk 'bo 100<11 leaders 
it would be possible to distinguish between bandits 
8n(1 ;po:l:iriots, -an(.\. th8 forlllr;)r could -chen be liquidated 
by e1 ther his or the French fo roes C) 
. .  
. 
• 
lIo Chi-If.tinh stated that he s'ti11 hoped -tio reaoh 
an agreement. 'wlt.h t.he French before his departure on 
september 14, but that in any case he must return on 
thHt (tCl.te since he hnd already been too ,long away from 
his oountryo 
Ho Chi-minh spoke at various times of the aid 
which he hoped to get from the United States, but was 
vague exoept as r egards economio . aido 
Wi-jjh regard to 
the lat'Ger,he explained that the riohes of his oountry 
were largely undeveloped, that he feJj~ tha't Indochina 
offered a ferGile field for American capital and enter-
priseo He had resisted and would oont.inue to resist 
the French desire for a continua'tlon of their former 
· polioy of economio monopoly. 
He was willing to give 
the Frenoh priority ·in suoh matters as advisers, con-
cessions, an~ purohases of maohinery ~nd equipment, 
but if the French were not in a posit~on to meet his 
country's needs he would insist on the riBht to ap-
proaoh 'othex friendly countries. He hinted that the 
1'o11.oy might apply to military and naval matt,e:rs as 
well and mentioned the naval bas~ at Cam Ranh bay. 
. 
. 
'$)I 
, As I left, Ho Chi-minh stated that he hope·d that 
through his contacts with the Embassy t-he .fum rlcan 
public would be informed 01' the true 81 tuation in 
Indoohina., 
c-lo4 
George M. Abbott 
t 
I 
