Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

proportions that any general is ready to take initiative in
leading coup. We cannot of course exclude emergence of a ‘Kong
Ie’ from ranks below general but key units in and around Saigon
are commanded by officers believed to be close and loyal to Diem."
(Saigon 538 to SecState, 5 September 1960, Section 2 of 2, p. 1)

Two months later, in November 1960, an abortive "Kong Le"
coup came close to succeeding, led by ITC Nguyen Chanh Thi, one of those
believed to have been most close and loyal to Diem.

The cable concluded that:
" , . » Real possibility demonstrations in Saigon exist...
any demonstration more likely to be initially loyal protests
calling for changes in policies and personnel around Diem but could
develop into anti-Diem riot ... " (Ibid., p. 2)

Ten days later, Durbrow sent a long analysis of the threats
confronting Diem, with recommendations for counter-measures, as a
precursor to presenting Diem with strong U.S. representations on the
need for changes. This discussion well expressed the complex problems
in which Diem was enmeshed, all of which had to be met adequately if the
regime was to survive; and it was an unusually explicit listing of the
sort of "reforms," so often alluded to since the Eisenhower letter of
October 1954, felt to be required if the Diem regime were to be
politically viable.

"As indicated our 495 and 538 Diem regime confronted by
two separate but related dangers. Danger from demonstrations
or coup attempt in Saigon could occur earlier; likely to be pre-
dominantly non-communistic in origin but communists can be
expected to endeavor infiltrate and exploit any such attempt.
Even more serious danger is gradual Viet Cong extension of
control over countryside which, if current communist progress
continues, would mean loss free Viet-lNam to communists. These
two dangers are related because communist successes in rural
areas embolden them to extend their activities to Saigon and
because non-communist temptation to engage in demonstrations or
coup is partly motivated by sincere desire prevent communist
take-over in Viet-Nam.

"Hssentially two sets of measures required to meet these two
dangers. For Saigon danger essentially political and psycho-
logical measures required. For countryside danger security
measures as well as political, psychological and economic
measures needed. However both sets measures should be carried
out simultaneously and to some extent individual steps will be
aimed at both dangers." (Saigon 624 to SecState, Section 1 of 2,
16 September 1960, p. 1, underlining added)

Da TOP SECRET - Sensitive
