Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the Deparinent of Siate should take up the question of prompt clari-
fication of our policy on Tndochitin, Tnas much as the final deterni-
nation of policy with respect to Indochina will probably involve and
depend upon discussions with the French Government, and in as much
as the Secretary of Sinte his expressed the wish that these discussions
should not be initinted at Joast while the present conference in San
Tranciseo is i session, consideration of the matter has been restricted
to the immediate iniplient ions of General de Gaulle’s message to the
effect that France wished to participate actively at the side of Ameri-

can forces in the campaign against Japan. This message was dis-
cussed with the Freneh Foreign Minister by the yest dont | and: by the
Acting Seeretary of State andl referred to in the President’s public
statement ** regarding his talks with M. Bidault. In the latter “the

*Telaised to the press May 18, Departient of State Bulletin, May 50, 1945,
Pee « ‘

President emphasized that we are faced with a still strong and deadly
enemy inthe Far East to whose defeat the total resources of this coun-
try, both in manpower and material, ave pledged. Me indicated that
such assistance as. France and our othor Allies may bring to that strug-
gle and which may be syuchronized with operations already planned
or underway, will be welcomed.”

Tn the conversation which took place in the W ae House on May 19,
1945, the President referred to General de Caulle’s message and ex-
pressed his appreciation of France’s offer of assistance. The Presi-
dent then said “that he had received a message from General de
Gaulle to the effect that France would be glad to participate in the
wis aeninst Japan alongside the United States and the President
expressed his appreciation of France’s offer of assistance. The Pre-
sident said that it is his poliey to leave to the Conmmander-in-Chief
in the field matters relating to the conduct of the war and that. in”
this case also he would wish to leave to the Commander-in-Chief, -
U.S. Army Forces, Pacific, * the deterinination of whether it would

* General of the Away Doujsas MacArthur.
practicable and helpful to have French forces jom with us in the
operationsagainst Japan. Te indicated that such assistance as France
and our other Allies might bring to the strugele in the Pacific, which
would synchronize with operations already planned or under way,
would be welcomed. The President thought that the question would
depend in large measure on the problem of transport, and, as the
Minister no doubt was aware, this was an miport anit probiem involy-
ing three tines the amount of tonnage that had been used in the war
in the Atlantic. This stibject was not further pursued.”

On the following day the same subject was again referred to in”
the following terms mm a conversation between the Acting Secretary
of State and the French Poreien Minister: “1 mentioned that among
the points which had been touched x pon at the White House was that
of French military assistance in the Far East in the war against
Japan. F reminded Mr. Vigault tia while the President had ex-
pressed Wiis peneral approval to Preuch iilitary association with us
in this theater, he had ¢inphasized that the problem was a re ilitary
one and would neeess sarily have to be judged on its merits by the
military wuthorilies. I said that in the circumstances it was up to

CON# FIDENTL a

28
