Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. D. 3+ THE SPIRTT AND PRACTICAL EFFECT OF GENEVA

1. The Accords, in Theory, are Clearly Drawn

a. The Primary Objective of the Accords is a Cease-Fire

The Geneva Accords -- that is, the armistice agreements for
Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, and the Final Declaration of the Conference
-- were designed primarily to end hostilities and re-establish peace in
Indochina, and secondarily to provide conditions conducive to the future
independent political development of the three States of the region. The
signed armistice agreements were military, the only exception being the
Declaration of the Royal Khmer Government, included in the Cambodia armis-
tice, guaranteeing the political rights of all its citizens. 1/ The
unsigned Geneva Final Declaration deals with a political settlement, but
in terms of future events -- elections to be held in Laos and Cambodia
during 1955 as provided in their constitutions, and elections to reunify
Vietnam following consultations within one year (by July, 1955), followed
by a national plebiscite within two years (July, 1956). The goal for all
of the powers at Geneva, both Western and Communist, was a cessation of
the war on terms that would permit subsequent progress toward their dis-
parate political objectives in Southeast Asia. All participants desired
what might be termed a profitable suspension of the fighting: the Commu-
nists wanted an agreement providing time for reconsolidation, and also a
political arrangement that would facilitate future expansion; the West
was willing to barter, holding out partition and elections in exchange
for disengagement of French forces, establishment of the GVN as a viable
political organization, and consolidation of. the non-Communist Southeast
Asian nations in a collective defense arrangement against the further
encroachments of Communism. ,

be Key Provisions for Partition and Elections

In retrospect, the key political provisions were those that
produced the partition of Vietnam, and promised elections within two
years. A short summation of the 47 articles and 2 annexes of the
"Acreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Viet-Nam, July 20, 1954"
signed only by the French and the DRV, follows below as a review of the
final Geneva position to which, theoretically, all delegates agreed:

(1) Summary of the Cease-Fire Agreement
Article

1. DMZ established; "Peoples Army of Vietnam regroups north and
French Union forces" south.

2. Regrouping to be completed in 300 days.

3. ICC to control joint waterways.

*

D-20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
