Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i 18°25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

= : ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Eur wee
nay i GF nee PEN
SFERSE WASHINGTON, BD, C. 29301

4 MAY 1367

SYSTEMS ANALYSIS

MEMORANDUM FOR SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

SUBJECT: Force levels and enemy attrition (U)

Although MACV has admitted to you that the vc/NVA forces can refuse to
fight when they want to, this fact has played no role in MACV's analysis of
strategy and force requirements. (For example, in his October 1965 brief-
ing, General DePuy said, "The more often we succeed at (search and destroy
operations) the less often will the VC stand and figsht.") Because enemy
attrition plays such a central role in MACV's thinking, and because the
enemy's degree of control over the pace of the action determines how well
he can control his attrition, we have taken a hard look at the facts on
the enemy's tactical initiative. From reliable, detailed accounts of 56
platoon-sized and larger fire-fights in 1966 we have classified these
fights according to how they develoved. The first four categories in the
table all represent cases in which the enemy willingly and ONE SEY stood
and fought in a pitched battle; these categories include 7 (84%) of the
56 battles. ae first three categories, enemy ambushes and assaults on our
forces, have 66% of the eases; these three plus category 4a, comprising the
cases where the enemy has the advantage of surprise, have 78% of the cases.

The results are independently confirmed from two sources. First, the
ARCOV study, which analyzed a different set of battles in late 1965 and
early 1966, found that 46% of the fights begin as enemy ambushes and that
the enemy starts the fight in 88% of the cases; moreover, it found that
63% of the infantry targets encountered were personnel in trenches or
bunkers. Second, we have analyzed the After-Action Reports submitted to
MACV by the line commanders in the field; although generally vague and in-
complete in their eS a of what happened, gid broadly confirm the
adrift of the above number's

These results imply that the size of the force we deploy has little
effect on the rate of attrition of enemy forces. This conclusion should
scarcely surprise you in view of the trend of enemy losses in 1966 and in
view of the obvious sensitivity of month-to-month enemy losses to his
known strategic initiatives. What is surprising to me is that MACV nas
ignored this type of information in discussing force levels. 31; srecormend | 5
that you inject this factor into the discussion. aut ’

it fos

GREED i § : 7
Pownraksd C2 S yosr HO = :
“Wahusexties after! £2 ye. Ot Me xe) toe “A
oHD Dis. CSOIAL0 sin
Alain Enthoven :
fosistant Secretary of Derensd,

Enclosure
| 11h * ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
