Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"2, Those activities which draw strength eway from the
enemy and add to GVN's strength and image of concern
for all its citizens...

"3. Those psychological activities that support the war
effort...

"kh, Those activities that persuade the people that
RVNAF is wholly on the side of the people and acting
in their interests...

down through:

"16. Those activities which develop the leadership and
organization of non-governmental institutions,
particularly youth groups..." 27/

It was scarcely a list from which one could assemble a coherent pro-
gram. Moreover, the above list of 16 "highest priority" tasks, was followed
by @ group of ten "high priority" tasks -- including strengthening provin-
cial governments, autonomous municipal governments, better budgetary proce-
dures, better refugee programs, minority programs, and so on. These, in
turn, were followed by a nine-point list of "high priority programs."

Into at least one of the 35 highest, high, or just plain priority activi-
ties, one could fit every program and project then being pursued in Viet-
nam. Furthermore, the proposal seemed to confuse inputs and outputs,
placing in the same category "wishes" like "minimizing the adverse iripact
of and exploiting the opportunities provided by the American presence”
(which was only "high priority") with "programs" like "creating a sound
base for agricultural development."

The Priorities Task Force recommendations were used, unlike those of
PROVN. In the FY 67 Country Assistance Program (CAP), submitted by AID
to Congress that fall, the Task Force Strategy statement was used as a
foreword, with Ambassador Lodge's approval. Moreover, the concept of
priorities outlined in the final paper was applied to the AID program in
Vietnem, with each activity being placed in one of the categories of pri-
ority. This did not result, however, in the original objective of reducing
the size of the program and focusing it: instead, the AID program more
than doubled in 1967, and a year later people were still complaining about
the lack of clear-cut priorities. (As a matter of fact, when Deputy Ambassa-
Gor Eugene Locke returned to Washington in September of 1967 with a "Blue-
print for Vietnam," he was told that it lacked any sense of priorities,
and. was too much of a “shopping list.")

The: "Roles and Missions" Study Group -- One of the Priority Task Force
recommendations was that the Mission should establish another group to examine
the question of the proper role of each military and paramilitary and police
and civilian force in the country. This group was set up, under the chair-
manship of Colonel George Jacobson in July of 1966, and submitted its final

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
