Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

cogent reasons against this solution. General Westmoreland
and I are now reluctantly prepared to recommend it to
Washington if the PM so desires and requests.

"Quat may agree at once but is likely to want to take
time to discuss the matter with Thieu and Minh. Even if he
should acquiesce, I would suggest another meeting on the sub-
ject with Quat, Thieu, Minh and Thi at which Westmoreland and
I would emphasize the limited mission of the Marines and their
non-involvement in pacification.

“Tf all goes well and concurrence is received, there should
be no problem about a press release. We would envision this
to be a short, joint GVN/US statement issued at once to the
effect that, at the request of GVN, the USG is landing two
battalions oF Marines to strengthen the security of the Da Nang
area until such time as they can be relieved by GVN forces. The
first BLT could then land at once and the second on call from MACV.

"I strongly urge a deferment of decision on landing in
remainder of MEB until the first two BLT's are ashore and in
place. By that time we will have around 7300 U.S. military
personnel in the Da Nang area and I doubt ability to absorb
or usefully employ the rest of the MEB. We can tell better
after the two BLT's are shaken dow. Taylor." 10/

In a subsequent meeting with GVN officials, Ambassador Taylor secured
their approval for the deployment. Generals Thieu and "Little" Minh ex-
pressed their concern about the possible reaction of the populace in the
Da Nang area and asked that the Marines be "brought ashore in the most
inconspicuous way feasible." 11/

EH. Hleventh Hour Change

One final obstacle to the Marine deployment was raised when Assistant
Secretary of Defense McNaughton cabled the Ambassador in Saigon on 2 March
stating that the 173rd Airborne Brigade, then stationed on Okinawa, would
be substituted for the Marines. 12/ Other than exchange of cables, there
is no documentary evidence in the files to indicate what might have been
the rationale behind the belated attempt to deploy the 173rd Airborne to
Da Nang in place of the Marines. One can only surmise the reasons behind
such a move, but certain characteristics of the two forces may provide a
clue. The Marines present prima facie a more formidable appearance upon
arrival on the scene. They have organic a complement of heavy weapons,
amphibious vehicles, and various other items of weighty hardware, in- .
cluding tanks, in contrast to the smaller and lighter airborne. Together
with their accompanying armada of. ships, the Marines might be seen as a
more permanent force than the airborne. This, coupled with the common
knowledge that the Marines have a long history of interventions in foreign
countries for purposes of peacekeeping and stability, might have influenced
someone in the decision apparatus to consider using the airborne in their

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
