Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

trial will not be fair if major quantifiable results are anticipated in
@ matter of months."

Carver's vision of pacification rested to a large degree on the idea
of gaining the active support of the population. He seemed opposed. to the
use of troops to merely protect terrain and the people who lived on it,
saying, "If an attempt is made to impose pacification on an unengaged popu-
lace by GVN or U.S. military forces, that attempt will fail."

He concluded, as he had begun:

"We agree with Secretary McNamara'’s prognosis that there
is little hope for a satisfactory conclusion of the war with-
in the next two years. We do not agree that "the odds are
Jess than even" for enlivening the pacification program.

If this were true, the U.S. would be foolish to continue the
struggle in Vietnam and should seek to disengage as fast as
possible. We think that if we esteblish adequate management
and. control on the U.S. side and ensure that the Vietnamese
follow through on redirecting their military resources as
promised, there are at least fair prospects for substantial
progress in pacification over the next two years." 48/

The JCS review of McNamare's memorandum was far more severe. While
agreeing thet "There is no reason to expect that the war ean be brought
soon to a successful conclusion," the Chiefs made a strong case, as usual,
for increased bombing, no predetermined force ceilings, and stated several
times in different ways that the wax was going very well indeed -- although
. this same point had been made by McNamara. The Chiefs also disagreed strongly
with the move for negotiations which Mcilamara had suggested. Any bombing
pause, they seid, would be regarded by Hanoi, by the GVN, and by our Allies,
as “renewed evidence of lack of U.S. determination to press the war to
@ suecessful conclusion."

On pacification, the JCS "adhered to their conclusion" that "to achieve
optimm effectiveness, the pacification program should be transferred to
COMISMACV. However, if for political reasons a civilian type organization
should be considered mandatory by the President, they would interpose no
objection.

"Nevertheless, they are not sanguine that an effective
civilian-type organization can be erected, if at all, except
at the expense of costly delays. As to the use of a substan-
tiel fraction of ARVN for pacification purposes, the JCS
concur. However, they desire to flag that adoption of this
eoncept will undoubtedly elicit charges of a U.S, takeover
of combat operations at increased cost in American casualties.” 49/

The JCS requested that their views be brought to the attention of the
President.

.

104
TOP SRCRET - Sensitive

