Le
Ww

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of us, of defeating the Viet Cong and of restoring peace to
your commmnity.'"*

The results of the survey conducted by the McNemara-Taylor mission
were consolidated into a lengthy, formal report to the President con-
taining specific findings, general evaluations, and recommendations. The
substance of the report was presented in an hour-long, oral briefing to
the President immediately upon the return of the mission on the morning
of 2 October. Attending the briefing were the Under Secretary of State,
the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, the Director of the
CIA, and the Special Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs. Following the personal report, the President called for a
special meeting of the full Netional Security Council, which was held
from six to seven that seme evening.

The MeNamara-Taylor Report generally was optimistic about the military
situation and saw little direct effect of the political crisis on the
prosecution of the war. Their conclusions, inter alia, were that despite
serious political tensions and the increasing unpopularity of the Diem-Nhu
regime, "The military campaign has made great progress and continues to
progress." GVN military officers, though hostile to the government and
its repressive policies, continued to perform their military duties in the
Jarger cause of fighting the Viet Cong enemy. This reassuring evaluation,
however, was caveated to the effect that "...further repressive actions
by Diem and Nhu could change the present favoreble military trends."

Specific findings in their appraisal of the military situation bore
out the general evaluation. In the body of the report they stated:

"With allowances for all uncertainties, it is oue firm con-
clusion that the GVN military program has made great progress in
the last year and a half, and that the progress has combtinued at
a fairly steady rate in the past six months even through the
period of greatest political unrest in Seigon. The tactics and
techniques employed by the Vietnamese under U.S. monitorship are
sound and give promise of ultimate victory."

Expecially noteworthy, in their view, was the progress clearly being
achieved in the northern areas (I and II Corps). Their appraisal of the
progress of the Strategic Hamlet Program was also largely favorable. In
both connections, they cited the effectiveness of the U.S. military advisory
and support effort.

Included among their military recommendations were;

a. General Harkins /ComUSMACV/ review with Diem the military
changes necessary to complete the military campaign in the
Northern and Central areas (I, II, III Corps) by the end of
1964, and in the Delta (IV Corps) by the end of 1965.

b. A program be established to train Vietnamese so that essential
functions now performed by U.S. military personnel can be

* Tr CICS (Taylor) to President Diem of RVN, 1 Oct 63 (delivered
2 Oct 63), TOP SECRET.
el TOP SECRET - ‘Sensitive
