Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

brother, Ngo Dinh Can) and to government authority, local officials
tried to disperse the crowds, When preliminary efforts produced no
results, the Catholic deputy province chief ordered his troops to fire.
In the ensuing melee, nine persons were killed, including some children,
and fourteen were injured. Armored vehicles allegedly crushed some of
the victims. The Diem government subsequently put out a story that a
Viet Cong agent had thrown a grenade into the crowd and thet the victims
had been crushed in a stampede, It steadfastly refused to admit
responsibility even when nevtral observers produced films showing
government troops firing on the crowd.

Diem's mandarin character would not permit him to handle this
erisis with the kind of flexibility and finesse it required. He was
incapable of publicly acknowledging responsibility for the tragedy and
seeking to conciliate the angry Buddhists. He was convinced that such
a public loss of face would undermine his authority to rule, oblivious
to the fact that no modern ruler can long ignore massive popular dis-
affection whatever his ow particular personal virtues may be, So the
government clung tenaciously to its version of what had occurred.

The following day in Hue over 10,000 people demonstrated in protest
of the killings. It was the first of the long series of protest activities
with which the Buddhists were to pressure the regime in the next four
months, The Buddhists rapidly organized themselves, and on May 10, a
manifesto of the Buddhist clergy was transmitted to the government demand-
ing freedom to fly their flag, legal equality with the Catholic Church,
an end of arrests and freedom to practice their beliefs, and indemiifica-
tion of the victims of the May 8th incident with punishment for its
perpetrators. 2/ These five demands were officially presented to
President Diem on May 15, and the Buddhists held their first press con-
ference after the meeting. Publicized hunger strikes and meetings con-
tinued throughout May, but Diem continued to drag his feet on placating
the dissenters or settling issues. On May 30, about 350 Buddhist
monks demonstrated in front of the National Assembly in Saigon, and a
48-hour hunger strike was announced, On June 3, a demonstration in Hue
was broken up with tear gas and several people were burned, prompting
charges that the troops had used mustard gas. On June 4, the govern-
ment announced the appointment of an interministerial committee headed
by Vice President Tho to resolve the religious issue, but by this time
such gestures were probably too late. large portions of the urban
population had rallied to the Buddhist protest, recognizing in it the
beginnings of genuine political opposition to Diem, On June 8, Mme,

Nhu exacerbated the problem by announcing that the Buddhists were
infiltrated by communists.

Throughout the early days of the crisis, the U.S. press had closely
covered the events and brought them to the attention of the world. On
June 11, the press was tipped off to be at a downtown intersection at
noon. lxpecting another protest demonstration, they were horrified to
witness the first burning suicide by 2 Buddhist monk. Thich Quang Duc's
fiery death shocked the world and electrified South Vietnam,

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
