Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. Paris: Diem's Time Is Up

At the same time Paris was fast losing patience. The
time has come to form a government responsive to dominant political
forces in Vietnam, to abandon the unrealistic U.S. policy of maintaining
and strengthening Diem, said France. Formation of a Conseil Superieur
was proposed, representative of Diem and his supporters, the sects,
intellectuals, politicians and the army. The Conseil. would decide policy
and a cabinet of non-political technicians headed by Diem would implement
it. 117/ But the U.S. rejected this plan saying Diem should be allowed
to strike back at the Binh Xuyen with force and France and America should
support him -- morally and logistically. 118/

Then Washington asked the Quai d'Orsay to answer a set of
questions designed to elicit specific French plans for the change in Viet-
hamese government. Paris' rejoinder: the questions should be answered
jointly or the united Franco-American effort in Vietnam would be over and
France would have to say publicly that the U.S. had assumed sole responsi-
bility for developments in Vietnam. 119/ But in mid-April, France filled-
in part of the questionnaire -- leaving blank a successor to Diem (only
joint consultation could decide this). Paris proposed Collins and Ely
draw up a slate of acceptable candidates for major positions. The U.S,
and French governments would agree on a final list, ask Bao Dai to summon
representatives of various factions to Cannes and on the basis of French-
U.S. recommendations, negotiate a solution to the sect-Binh Xuyen-Dien
impasse. Sect support would be assured by their membership in a high
council and a program of honors, indemnification and integration of sect
troops into the National Army. 120/

e. Bao Dai's Plan

On April 21, Bao Dai announced his own plan for resolving
the crisis, remarkably similar to that submitted by Paris. Bao Dai wanted
to summon various representatives to Cannes, name Dr. Quat as premier, ask
him to form a cabinet of technicians and a high council of notables. On
April 26, Bao Dai said he would implement the scheme unilaterally uniess
the U.S. made some response by the following day. 121/

Meanwhile, Collins had left Saigon for consultations with
Dulles. Lansdale reports a meeting held just before his departure:

He (Collins ) told Lansdale not to be worried by newspaper
rumors that the US would stop supporting Diem. Lansdale
asked then if his orders were to continue supporting Diem;
Collins said yes. Members of the country team privately
felt that Diem should be supported by us, that the National
Army was ready to support him and had the capability of
defeating the Binh Xuyen. 122/

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
