Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

ey

ed

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

tt is apparent from this and other documents that GVN stability and
morale were perceived by the Administration as the principal pacing
elements for Southeast Asian policy in the post-Tonkin period. |

ANTICIPATION OF WIDER ACTION

Through most of the strategy discussions of early autumn, South
Vietnam was the main focus of attention. However, with increasing fre-
quency its political and military conditions were referred to in a new
way. More and more it was being evaluated in terms of its suitability
as a base for wider action. Ambassador Taylor cautioned that "we should
not get involved militarily with North Vietnam and possibly with Red China
if our base in South Viet Nem is insecure and Khanh's army is tied down
everywhere by the VC insurgency." 120/ At the September meeting, Mr.
MeCone criticized the actions recomended by the JCS as being very dangerous
because of the current weakness of the GVN base. On 23 September, Walt
Rostow wrote to Ambassador Taylor of the need for building a more viable
political system in South Vietnam "which will provide us with an adequate
base for what we may later have to do." 121

General Scheme. The kind of operations for which "an adequate
base" was increasingly considered essential is evident in a number of
strategy discussions of the period. Moreover, it is clear that several
officials shared the expectation that these operations would begin early
in the new year. It will be recalled that the series of actions recom-
mended to President Johnson by his top advisors at the end of May -- most
of which had been completed within a few days of the Tonkin Gulb incidents --
were intended to culminate, if necessary, in a strike against North Vietnam
accompanied by an active diplomatic offensive that included agreement to a
negotiated settlement. 122 Further, Phase ITI of the approved contingency
OPLAN 37-64, developed in response to NSAM 288, provided for the application
of overt graduated pressures against North Vietnam -- primarily air strikes.
These were to be carried out by the GVN, but which would also include opera-
tions by U.S. air and naval forces. Deployments of additional forces to
Southeast Asia in early summer and in the itmediate aftermath of the Tonkin
Gulf incidents were based on force requirements identified to support this
plan. Its perceived significance during the post-Tonkin period was indi-
cated when Ambassador Taylor reported that the objectives of the U.S.
Mission in Saigon included preparation to implement OPLAN 37-64 "with opti-
mum readiness by January 1, 1965." 123/

Subsequent strategy discussions reflected the extent to which

“the new year was anticipated as the occasion for beginning overt military
operations against North Vietnam. Both the 3tate Department's mid-August
strategy analysis and the working paper on which it was based indicated
‘that the “limited pressures" (subsequently authorized by NSAM 314) would
extend "tentatively through December." However, these actions were per-
ceived as "foreshadowing systematic military action against the DRV," which
"we might at some point conclude...was required.". (Noteworthy is the point
of view that these actions might be ordered "either because of incidents
arising from [the Limited pressures/ or because of deterioration in the

~ 32 TOP: SECRET - Sensitive
