Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in SVN appears so critical in CY 1967 that I cannot recom~
mend any additions to Program #4, at least until CY 1968.

A detailed troop list has been prepared to define
precisely Program #4. As soon as it can be reproduced, it
will be provided to you for transmission to the JCS. This
should be by close of business tomorrow, November 10.

One can speculate that the two officials carried back detailed plans
and costs associated with the earlier broad force decision made the
preceding week-end.

It appears they were quite ready to talk about Vietnam. General
Wheeler read a short prepared statement explaining that after his recent
trip he was able to report to the President thet "the war in my judgment
continues in a yery favorable fashion. General Westmoreland retains the
initiative and in every operation to date has managed to defeat the
enemy." Beyond this, questions about Vietnam were little more than
rehash of the previous week's session. 72/

On ll Noveriber, the Secretary of Defense informed the JCS formally
that he had approved a new deployment program for MACV with an end
strength of 470,000 by June of 1968.

I have reviewed your recommendations in JCSM-702-66 ,
November 4, 1966, and the related military and economic
effects of your recommended deployments. The attached
table summarizes your plan and the forces which I am
approving for planning purposes.

AS you know, a reasonably stable economy in South
Vietnam is essential to unite the population behind the
Government of Vietnam -- indeed to avoid disintegration
of the SVN society. Runaway inflation can undo what our
military operations accomplish. For this reason, we have
already taken actions to reduce military and contractor
plaster spending toyards the minimum level which can be.
accomplished without serious impact on military operations.
Nevertheless, the price stability achieved last summer may
be giving way to a new round of severe inflation. More
must be done.

Ambassador Lodge has asked that U.S. military Spending
be held to P42 billion in CY 1967. The Ambassador proposed
program of tightly constrained U.S. and GVN civilian and
military spending will not bring complete stability to SVN;
there would still be, at best, a 10 billion piaster infle-
tionary gap. It would, however, probably hold price rises in
CY 1967 to 10%-25% as opposed to 75%-90% in FY 1966. ‘The

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
103
