Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and continued to play off the province chiefs against the generals. Some
aspects of the CIP were accepted, but the basic organizational issues
remained unresolved and the strategic approach unresolved by default.

The unsuccessful U.S. attexsts to secure organizational reforms
within the Diem government had assured psychological primacy by the time
of General Taylor's October 1961 mission to Saigon. The American posi-
tion was essentially that no operaticnal plan could succeed unless GVN
were reorganized to permit effective implementation. It was reorganiza-
tion that Taylor emphasized, as detailed above. But General Taylor did
bring up the need for some coordinated operational plan in his talks with
President Diem. Diem's response is described in a cable to Washington
by Ambassador Nolting:

Taylor several times stressed importance of overall.
plan -- military, political, economic, psychological, etc. --
for dealing with guerrillas. tem tended avoid clear re-
sponse this suggestion but finally indicated that he has
@ new strategic plan of his own. Since it was not very clear
in spite efforts to draw him out what this plan is, Taylor
asked him to let us have a copy in writing. 34

E. Thompson's Counterproposa.ls

President Diem may have been whistling in the dark about & new
plan of his own. It is likely, however, that he was already conversant
with the ideas of a new high level edivisor who had been in Saigon for
several weeks and whose approach to prosecuting the war he would soon en-
dorse officially as his own. The advisor was RGK Thompson, 4 British civil
servant who had come from the position of Permanent Secretary of Defense
in Malaya. Thompson's British Adviscry Mission was in Saigon in response
to Diem's request for experienced third country nationals to assist him
in his counterinsurgent operations. There had been some initial U.S. ob-
jection to British "advice without responsibility," but fears had been
temporarily allayed when it was agresd that Thompson's charter would be
limited to civic action matters.

Thompson provided Diem his initial "appreciation" (or, in U.S.
terminology, "estimate of the situation") in October 1961. 35/ His assess-
ment was well received by the President, who asked him to follow it up with
a specific plan. Thompson's response, an outline plan for the pacifica-
tion of the Delta area, was given to the President on 13 November. Thus,
Thompson was in the process of articulating one potentially comprehensive
strategic approach at the same time that the U.S. was deeply involved in
fashioning a major new phase in U.S.-GVI relations in which major new U.S.
aid would be tied to Diem's acceptance of specified reforms and, inferentially,
to his willingness to pursue some agreed, coordinated strategy. Thompson's
plan was, in short, a potential rival to the American-advanced plans repre-
sented by the CIP and the geographically phased MAAG plan of September 1961.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
10
