Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The degree to which the international force was believed to offer a
useful option seems to have been in question. While the State Department
and other non-military agencies apparently favored it, the Department of
Defense was less than enthusiastic. At the 19 December Principals meet-—
ing, for example, all of those present agreed that "suitable planning
toward such a force should go forward" except Assistant Defense Secretary
Meliaughton. He stated that he thought the idea had been shelved. 195/
Later, in their review of the Joint Staff's study, the services expressed
reservations concerning the concept. They questioned its military
utility, due to the deployments being framed-essentially within a narrow
deterrent context. They recommended instead a continued adherence to the
deployment concept in the approved SHATO plans, which in their totality
were aimed at the military defense of all Southeast Asia. The Army, in
particular, expressed concern regarding routes and modes of possible DRV
advance into South Vietnam that differed from those assumed by the study's
below-the-DMZ concept. The Air Force pointed out that the international
force concept conflicted with the JCS concept for deterring and dealing
ee overt DRV/CHICOM aggression as submitted on 14 November (JCSM-955-61).
196 /

Mr. McNaughton's comments on 19 December seem to have been correct.
The case files containing the service comments on the international force
concept indicate no further action by the JCS after mid-Jenuary.

In the meantime, however, a different approach to attracting wider
allied participation in the military defense of South Vietnam appeared
promising. On 29 December, osp/TSA reported readiness on the part of
the Philippine, ROK and GRC Governments to provide various forms of assist-
ance to South Vietnam. Included in the available Philippine and Korean
packages were an assortment of military forces. The ROX Joint Chiefs of
Staff offered a combat engineer battalion, an engineer field maintenance
team, an Army transportation company, and a Marine Corps combat engineer
company. The Philippine Government stated its willingness to send a
reinforced infantry battalion, an engineer construction battalion, and
some Special Forces units. 197/

2. Relations with the GN

Following his second meeting with President Johnson, Ambassador
Taylor returned to Saigon. He arrived on 6 December amid press specula~
tion concerning the details of his instructions and subsequent U.S.
actions. 198/ The basic charge given him by the President had been well
publicized since their meeting on the 1st; "to consult urgently with the
government of Prime Minister Tran Van Huong at to measures to be taken
to improve the situation in all its aspects." However, such a diplo-
matically worded statement left much room for imaginative interpretation
-- particularly in view of the Ambassador's "unannounced stopover in
Hong Kong to get a briefing by U.S. 'China watchers' in that listening
post." Several correspondents speculated on the likelihood of air action

- 67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
