4

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It has been held that, the declaratory policy of the State of Vietnam
disassociating itself from the Geneva Accords notwithstanding, Vietnam was
obligated by the Treaty of Independence (4 June 1954) to accept France's
action on its behalf at Geneva. Yet, the reference in the Treaty of Inde-
pendence to Vietnam's observance of treaties end conventions signed for it
by France is in the past tense; no provision is made for France to conclude
binding agreements after 4 June on Vietnam's behalf. The passage of
Article 27 of the Geneva Agreements in question charges France with the
responsibility of insuring Western compliance with the terms of the agree-
ments, as far as the southern part of Vietnam was concerned. Indeed,
throughout the conference, France was one of the two principal protagonists,
shaped the final position accepted by the West, and signed the cease-fire
agreements (the final declaration was not signed, an oral declaration of
assent being substituted when it became clear that the U.S. would not sign
-- the U.S. refrained also from joining in the oral assent). French forces
and political elements were present in South Vietnam and were not required,
under the agreements, to be removed. It was not at this time envisioned
by any of the Geneva Convention nations that France would precipitately with-
draw its armed forces from Vietnam.

b. GVN Position Is Anomalous

It was generally recognized at Geneva that the position of
the GVN was, at best, contradictory. The GVN asserted its desire for
international status by demanding concessions which the other nations
considered impossible. The GVN also was severe in criticism of the French,
while at the same time acknowledging a debt to France for its very existence
in the face of Viet Minh military and political pressures -- which even
France, at that time, could barely sustain. The unsupported opposition of
the GVN was understood by the other nations as a small country's fight for
survival.

Partition, regroupment, and cease-fire conditions intended to lead to
a final political settlement at Geneva, were all imposed on Saigon. While
it is true that the alternatives offered by the GVN were impractical and
unacceptable given the extent of Viet Minh territorial and population con-
trol, the salient fact is that the GVN, speaking from what it regarded as
an independent position, held fast against every proposal that departed
from its concepts of national unity and self-determination. The limitations
on the GVN‘'s role as an independent participant at the Conference stemmed
from French determination to conclude a settlement in line with French
interests. France commanded the power to attract Conference support; the
GVN did not. However, the GVN was neither obligated by previous commit-
ment, by its legal status, nor by the Accords themselves to abide by the
Franco-Viet Minh agreements which emerged. This anomaly ultimately made
France, and French presence in Vietnam, pivotal to the fulfillment of the
Geneva agreements.

B-27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
