Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

he pass on to the President) and the other on worldwide force posture. 11}/
In the former they argued that the objectives of causing NVN to pay an
inereasing price for support of the war in the South and interdicting such
support had only been partially achieved, because the "incremental and
restrained" application of air power had enabled NVN to “anticipate US
actions and accomodate to the slow increase in pressure." They noted

that NVN had greatly increased its imports in 1966 and that record ton-
nages were continuing in 1967, and said they were concerned about the
possible introduction of new weapons which could improve NVN's air and
coastal defenses and pose an offensive threat to friendly forces and
installations in SVN. They called for an immediate expansion of the
bombing

---to include attacks on all airfields, all port
complexes, all land and sea lines of communication in
the Hanoi-Haiphong area, and mining of coastal harbors
and coastal waters. 115/

The intensified bombing should be initiated during the favorable May-
September weather season, before the onset of poor flying conditions over
NVN. The bombing should include “target systems whose destruction would
have the most far-reaching effect on NVN's capability to fight," such as
electric power plants, ports, airfields, additional barracks and supply
depots, and transportation facilities. The 30-mile circle around Hanoi
should be shrunk to 10 miles and the 10-mile cirele around Haiphong should
be reduced to 4. -Armed reconnaissance should be authorized throughout

NVN and adjacent coastal waters except in populated areas, the China buffer
zone, and the Hanoi/Haiphong circles. Inland waterways should be mined
all the way up to the China buffer zone. 116/

On May 24 General Wheeler provided his views on two alterna-
tive courses of action in response to a request from Vance: (1) add 250,000
troops in SVN and intensify the bombing against NVN, and (2) hold the troop
increase to 70,000 more and hold the bombing below 20° unless required by
military necessity -- or, "if necessary to provide an opportunity for a
negotiated settlement," stop it altogether. In his memorandum to the
‘SecDef, to which a lengthy Joint Staff study of the alternatives was attached,
General Wheeler said that a partial or complete cessation of strikes against
NVN would allow NVN to recoup its losses, expand its stockpiles, and con-
tinue to support’ the war from a sanctuary. This would be costly to
friendly forces and prolong the war. It couid be interpreted as a NYN
victory -- an “aerial Dien Bien Phu." 117/

The Chairman recommended instead the adoption of the JCS
program for the conduct of the war, which included air strikes to reduce
external aid to NVN, destroy its in-country resources, and disrupt move-
ment into the South. The strikes would be designed to “isolate the

54 _ OP SECRET - Sensitive
