Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"But there was still a third supporting judgment that, like the
others, ran through the calculations of the period. This was that the
largely new nations of Southeast Asia were in fact valid national enti-
ties and that while their progress might be halting and imperfect both
politically and economically, this progress was worth backing. To put
it another way, there was a constructive vision of the kind of Southeast
Asia that could evolve and a sense that this constructive purpose was
worth pursuing as a matter of our own ideals, as a matter of our national
interest, and as a realistic hope of the possibilities of progress if
external aggression and subversion could be held at bay.

"These I believe to have been the bedrock reasons for the position
we took in Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia at this time. They were overlaid
by what may appear to have been emotional factors in our attitude toward
communism in China and Asia. But the degree of support that this major
policy undertaking received at the time went far beyond those who held
these emotions. And this is why I for one believe that the bedrock
reasons I have given were the true and decisive ones."

SE:

"....Despite all that romantics like /Jean/ Lacouture may say, what
happened was that Hanoi moved in, from at least 1959 onward (Bernard Fall
would say from 1957), and provided a cutting edge of direction, trained
men from the North, and supplies that transformed internal discontent into
a massive subversive effort guided and supported from the outside in
erucial ways."

ae Sure Say

"..-But those who believe that serious mistakes were made, or even
that the basic policy was wrong, cannot escape the fact that by 1961 we
were, as a practical matter, deeply engaged in Southeast Asia and speci-
fically in the preservation of the independence of South Viet-Nam.

"president Kennedy came to office with a subversive effort against
South Viet-Nam well underway and with the situation in Laos deteriorating
rapidly. And for a time the decisions on laos overshadowed Viet-Nam,
although of course the two were always intimately related.

"In Laos, President Kennedy in the spring of 1961 rejected the idea
of strong military action in favor of seeking a settlement that would
install a neutralist government under Souvanna Phouma, a solution uniquely
appropriate to Laos. Under Governor fii. Averell/ Harriman's astute
handling, the negotiations finally led to the Geneva accords of 1962 for
Iaos; and the process--a point not adequately noticed--led the United
States to a much more explicit and affirmative endorsement of the Geneva
accords of 1954, a position we have since consistently maintained as the
best basis for peace in Viet-Nam.

D-114
