Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

McNamara, himself came down on the side of a “hard-line”
pause -~ a “soft-line" pause would make sense, he noted, only if the
U.S. sought a "compromise" outcome. The words "hard-line" and "soft-
line" became terms of art, employed by all of the principals in their
papers dealing with the question of a pause. Throughout this discussion,
it was taken for granted that bombing would be resumed. The only point
at issue was how. On 3 December, John McNaughton wrote an "eyes only"
memorandum (whose eyes was not specified, but presumably they included
those of the Secretary of Defense) entitled, "Hard-Line Pause Packaged
to Minimize Political Cost of Resuming Bombing." He specified four
conditions, all of which would have to be met by the enemy in order to
forestall the resumption of bombing:

"a. The DRV stops infiltration and direction of the
war.

b. The DRV moves convincingly toward withdrawal
of infiltrators.

ce. The VC stop attacks, terror and sabotage.

d. The VC stop significant interference with the
GVN's exercise of governmental functions over substantially
all of South Vietnam." 36/

Clearly it was unlikely that the enemy would even begin
to meet any of these conditions, but Hanoi, at least (if not the NLF),
might move towards some sort of negotiations. In that event, the resump-
tion of bombing when "peace moves" were afoot would incur a heavy polit-
ical price for the United States. In order to maintain the political
freedom to resume bombing without substantial costs, the U.S. govern-
ment would have to make clear from the outset that it intended only a
pause, certainly not a permanent cessation of the bombing, and that
its continuation would depend upon definite actions by the enemy. Yet
there was a problem, as McNaughton saw it, as to which definite actions
to specify. He recognized that the United States could not easily list
the conditions he had put forward earlier in his memorandum. McNaughton
expressed his dilemma in the following terms:

Inconsistent objectives. A Pause has two objectives--
(a) To influence the DRV to back out o° the war and (b) to
create a public impression of US willingness "to try every-
thing" before further increases in military action. To maxi-
mize the chance that the DRV would decide to back out would
require presenting them with an explicit proposal, in a form
where some clearly defined conduct on their part would assure
them of no more bombings. The truth of the matter, however,
is that the hard-line objective is, in effect, capitulation

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
