Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

of ideology. Marx is proven wrong once again: for it is the closed
Communist societies, not the free and open societies which carry within
themselves the seeds of internal disintegration.

"Nhe diserray of the Communist empire has been heightened by two
other formidable forces. One is the historical force of nationalism
-- and the yearning of all men to be free. The other is the gross in-
efficiency of their economies. For a closed society is not open to
ideas of progress -- and a police state finds that it cannot command the
grain to grow. io!

"New nations asked to choose between two competing systems need only
compare conditions in East and West Germany, Eastern and Western Europe,
North and South Viet-ilam. They need only compare the disillusionment of
Communist Cuba with the promise of the Alliance for Progress. And all
the world knows that no successful system builds a wall to keep its people
in and freedom out -- and the wall of shame dividing Berlin is a symbol of
Communist failure.

"Finally, what can we do to move from the present pause toward endur-
ing peace? Again I would counsel caution. I foresee no spectacular re-
versal in Communist methods or goals. But if all these trends and develop-
ments can persuade the Soviet Union to walk the path of peace, then let :
her know that all free nations will journey with her. But until that
choice is made, and until the world can develop a reliable system of inter-
netional security, the free peoples have no choice but to keep their arms
nearby.

x + SF

"In short, let our adversaries choose. If they choose peaceful com-
petition, they shall have it. If SaSy come to realize that their ambitions
cannot succeed -- if they see their ‘wars of liberation' and subversion
will ultimately fail -- if they recognize that there is more security in
accepting inspection then in permitting new nations ‘to master the black
arts of nuclear war -- and if they are willing to turn their energies, as
we are, to the great unfinished tasks of our own peoples -- then, surely,
the areas of agreement can be very wide indeed: a clear understanding
about Berlin, stability in Southeast Asia, an end to nuclear testing, new
checks on surprise or accidental attack, and, EE RELY > general and
complete Cag een nents

ag

"My friends: I close on a note of hope. We are not lulled by the
momentary calm of the sea or the somewhat clearer skies above. We know
the turbulence that lies below, and the storms that are beyond the
horizon this year. But now the winds of change appear to be blowing
more strongly than ever, in the world of communism as well as our own...

x % =

*

C-26
