Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to military planning as required by the situation in the area.'
Shortly thereafter the Australian delegation-proposed the follow-
ing addition to Article V: ‘The Council shall set up such sub-
sidiary machinery as may be necessary to achieve the military

and other objectives of the Treaty.’ Since the Australian proposal
involved an open ended commitment, this Department and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff opposed it and accepted the wording suggested by
the Defense Representative. The Department of State agreed, and
instructed the U.S. Delegation to support incorporation of this
wording in Article IV." 32/

Secretary Dulles was able to bring about deletion of the references to
periodic or regular consultation that had been introduced into the draft
treaty.

f. Treaty Longevity

The final NATO articles (11-14) are administrative, covering
ratification of the treaty, the length of time it is to remain in force,
provisions for review of the articles, and archival responsibilities. ~
These are paralleled in SEATO articles IX-XI. The NATO Treaty provides
for withdrawal of its members after 1969; members are to give a year's
notice prior to such action. The SEATO Treaty is to remain in force in-
definitely, but members also may withdraw on one year's notice.

g- The Appended U.S. "Understanding"

Throughout the discussions at Manila the U.S. insisted that
the focus of the pact be on the prevention of further communist expansion
in the treaty area. When the other nations would not acquiesce to a word-
ing of the treaty to make anti-communism its specific objective, the U.S.
requested that an "understanding" be appended to the treaty. This was a
U.S. unilateral statement of intent -- a qualifier upon the first paragraph
of Article IV., in which the members agreedthat in the event of aggression
they will "act to meet the common danger in accordance with constitutional
processes." The U.S. in the understanding restricts the applicability of
its agreement to act, stating that only communist aggression will be recog-
nized as warranting immediate response. In the event of other kinds of
aggression, the U.S. would consult with the other member nations. Admiral
Davis reported disagreement over this point at the conference:

"All participating States except the United States supported
exclusion of the word 'Communist' from the Treaty. The U.S. draft
originally referred to 'Communist aggression’ in the preamble and
in Article IV. The chief reason advanced by the other signatories
for the deletion was the desire of most of the Parties that the
Treaty cover any kind of aggression in the area. Pakistan, for
example, wished that the Treaty would apply to possible aggression
by India. The United States position was that the United States
could not properly say that any aggression in Southeast Asia would
endanger its own peace and safety, and that it could accept the

A-20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
