Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~~ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

by indefinitely dangling before us (and the world) the
prospect of negotiations with no intent cf reaching an
acceptable settlement. It might also tempt the Soviet
Union to make threats that would render very difficult a
decision to resume bombing.

(c) In Saigon, obtaining South Vietnamese acquies-
cence to a pause would be difficult. It could adversely
affect the Government's solidity. Any major falling out
between the Government and the United States or any over-
turn in the Government's political structure could set us
back very severly (sic).

(a) An additional factor is that undertaking the
second course of action following a pause five, "extrapo-
lation’ of ROLLING THUNDER/ would give this course a much
more dramatic character, both internationally and domes-
tically, and would, in particular, present the Soviets with
those difficult choices that we have heretofore been suc-
eessful in avoiding.

After this summary of the competing arguments, the State paper --
speaking for Secretary Rusk -- came down against a bombing pause.
The paper continued:

On balance, the arguments against the pause are con-
vincing to the Secretary of State, who recommends that it
not be undertaken at the present time. The Secretary of
State believes that a pause should be undertaken only when
and if the chances were significantly greater than they
now appear that Hanoi would respond by reciprocal actions
leading in the direction of a peaceful settlement. He
further believes that, from the standpoint of international
and domestic opinion, a pause might become an overriding
requirement only if we were about to reach the advanced
stages of an extrapolated Rolling Thunder program involving
extensive air operations in the Hanoi/Haiphong area. Since
the Secretary of State believes that such advanced stages
are not in themselves desirable until the tide in the South
4g more fayorable, he does not feel that, even accepting
the point of view of the Secretary of DePense, there is
now any international requirement to consider a "Pause." 31/

Basic to Rusk's position, as John McNaughton pointed out
in a memorandum to Secretary McNamara the same day, was the assumption
that a bombing pause was & (card which could be "played! only once.

In fact, McNaughton wrote, it is more reasonable to think that it
could be played any number of times, with the arguments against it,

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
