Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Laotian Panhandle. The option also included individual U.S. reprisal
actions "not only against such incidents as the Gulf of Tonkin ettacks
but also against any recurrence of VC 'spectaculars' such as Bien Hoa.”
The aim of these actions would be to deter repetitions of and to punish
for such actions in South Vietnam, "put not to a degree that would

create strong international negotiating pressures.”

Basic to Oction A was its provision for "continued rejection of
negotiation in the hope that the situation will improve." However, it
ineluéed recognition that "the GVN itself, or individual South Vietnamese
in potentially powerful positions" might initiate "discussions with Henoi
or the Liberation Front." If a coalition govermment were thus arrenged,
the Working Group believed, the odds were that it would eventually “be
taken over by the Communist element." In the event of such discussions,
the U.S. response under Option A might be either (1) "stand aside," thus
disassociating the United States from such a settlement, or (2) "seek to
cover a retreat by accepting negotiations" through something like «2
Geneva conference, which might buy edditional time. 72/

Option B provided for everything included in "A" plus a program
of U.S. military pressures against North Vietnam. These were to con-
tinue "at a fairly rapid pace and without interruption" until the DRV
agreed to stop supporting and directing the wer in South Vietnam and
Laos. The pressures were to begin with attacks on infiltration targets
and increase in intensity; however, the option included provision that
an early attack on Phuc Yen airfield and certain key bridges in the
northern part of North Vietnam might be required "to reduce the chances
of DRV interference with the spectrum of actions” that were contemplated.

Although our public position on negotiations would be "totally
inflexible" under Option B, it provided for recognition of the need to
negotiate eventually. Under B, this would occur simultaneously with a
continuation and escalation of the pressures and would be based on
"inflexible insistence on our present objectives." Nevertheless, "B"
acknowledged the need "to deal with channels of [international communi-
cation, the UN, and perhaps -- despite our strong opposition -- a
reconvened Geneva Conference of some sort” even before we agreed to
enter into settlement talks. Moreover, while resisting negotiations,
the option provided for (1) making "the strongest possible public case
of the importance, increase, and present intolerable level of DRV in-
filtration” and (2) "strengthening the picture of a military situation
in South Vietnam requiring the application of systematic military force."73/

Option C provided for every military action included in "A" plus
"graduated military moves against infiltration targets, first in Laos and
then in the DRV, and then against other targets in North Vietnem." The
air strikes on infiltration routes within North Vietnam were to be pre-
ceded by low-level reconnaissance flights over. the same general area.
Advantege was seen in initiating such measures "following either additional

ne)
ine)

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
