Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

reaffirmed it, as recently as their reception of their great and good
friend, Albania, two days ago.

"Now we believe that the free nations of Asia must brace themselves,
get themselves set; with secure, progressive, stable institutions of
their own, with co-operation among the free nations of Asia --~ stretching
from Korea and Japan right around to the subcontinent -- if there is to
be peace in Asia over the next 10 or 20 years. We would hope that in
China there would emerge a generation of leadership that would think ser-
iously about what is called "peaceful co-existence,’ that would recognize
the pragmatic necessity for human beings to live together in peace, rather
than on a basis of continuing warfare.

"Now from a strategic point of view, it is not very attractive to
think of the world cut in two by Asian Communism, reaching out through
Southeast Asia and Indonesia, which we know has been their objective;
and that these hundreds of millions of people in the free nations of Asia
should be under the deadly and constant pressure of the authorities in
Peking, so that their future is circumscribed by fear.

"Now these are vitally important matters to us, who are both a
Pacific and an Atlantic power. After all, World War II hit us from the
Pacific, and Asia is where two-thirds of the world's people live. So
we have a tremendous stake in the ability of the Free Nations of Asia to
live in peace; and to turn the interests of people in Mainland China to
the pragmatic requirements of their own people, and away from a doctrin-
aire and ideological adventurism abroad.

"Q. Could I ask just one follow-up question on that, sir:

"Do you think you can fulfill this very large commitment of con-
tainment and still meet the commitment of the Manila Conference -- to
withdraw within six months after a peace agreement has been reached?

"A. Oh, yes, I think so.

"Phat does not mean that we ourselves have nominated ourselves to
be the policemen for all of Asia. We have, for good reasons, formed
alliances with Korea and Japan, the Philippines, the Republic of China,
. Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand; and South Viet-Nam is covered by
the Southeast Asia Treaty. .

"That doesn't mean that we are the general policemen. Today, the
Iaotien forces are carrying the burden in Laos on the ground. The Thais
are carrying the burden in Thailand; the Burmese are carrying the burden
in Burma; the Indians are carrying the burden upon their northeastern
frontier -- the Sikkim border -- and whatever other threat there might
be in that direction.

"But we have our part; we have accepted a share, and we have accepted
that share as a part of the vital national interest of the United States."

D-125
