Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

T.. A. U.S. POLICY, 1940-1950
SUMMARY

Significant misunderstanding has developed concerning U.S. policy
towards Indochina in the decade of World War II and its aftermath. A
number of historians have held that anti-colonialism governed U.S. policy
and actions up until 1950, when containment of communism supervened.

For example, Bernard Fall (e.g. in his 1967 post-mortem book, Last
Reflections On a War) categorized American policy toward Indochina in

six periods: “(l1) Anti-Vichy, 1940-1945; (2) Pro-Viet Minh, 1945-1946;

(3) Non-involvement, 1946 - June 1950; (4) Pro-French, 1950 - July 1954;
(5) Non-military involvement, 1954 ~ November 1961; (6) Direct and full
involvement, 1961 - ." Commenting that the first four periods are those
"least known even to the specialist," Fall developed the thesis that
President Roosevelt was determined "to eliminate the French from Indo-
china at all costs," and had pressured the Allies to establish an inter-
national trusteeship to administer Indochina until the nations there

were ready to assume full independence. This obdurate anti-colonialism,
in Fall's view, led to cold refusal of American aid for French resistance
fighters, and to a policy of promoting Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh as
the alternative to restoring the French bonds. But, the argument goes,
Roosevelt died, and principle faded; by late 1946, anti-colonialism
mutated into neutrality. According to Fall: "Whether this was due to

a deliberate policy in Washington or, conversely, to an absence of policy,
is not quite clear....The United States, preoccupied in Europe, ceased to
be a diplomatic factor in Indochina until the outbreak of the Korean War."
In 1950, anti-communism asserted itself, and in a remarkable volte-face,
the United States threw its economic and military resources behind France
in its war against the Viet Minh. Other commentators, conversely --
prominent among them, the historians of the Viet Minh -~ have described
U.S. policy as consistently condoning and assisting the reimposition of *
French colonial power in Indochina, with a concomitant disregard for the
nationalist aspirations of the Vietnamese.

Neither interpretation squares with the record; the United States
was less concerned over Indochina, and less purposeful than either assumes.
Ambivalence characterized U.S. policy during World War II, and was the
root of much subsequent misunderstanding. On the one hand, the U.S.
repeatedly reassured the French that its colonial possessions would be
returned to it after the war. On the other hand, the U.S. broadly com-
mitted itself in the Atlantic Charter to support national self-determination,
and President Roosevelt personally and vehemently advocated independence
for Indochina. F.D.R. regarded Indochina as e flagrant example of onerous
colonialism which should be turned over to a trusteeship rather than
returned to France. The President discussed this proposal with the Allies
at the Cairo, Teheran, and Yalta Conferences and received the endorse-
ment of Chiang Kai~shek and Stalin; Prime Minister Churchill demurred.

A-1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
