Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of leakage at the South Vietnam end. Thus, publicity seems
almost inevitable to us here for any attack that did signifi-

cant damage." 77/

B. A New Scenario: 30 Days of Sequential Politico-Military Action

On the same day that the JCS urged that the GVN be consulted regard-
ing preparations for border control and reteliatory operations, the new
scenario of political and military actions was completed. The scenario
called for a 30-day sequence of military and political pressures coupled
with initiatives to enter negotiations with Hanoi (see Table 1). Military
actions would not start until after "favorable action on a U. S. Con-
gressional Joint Resolution" supporting U. S. resistance to DRV aggres-
sions in Southeast Asia. Initially, the strikes would be carried out by
GVN aircraft, but as they progressed, USAF/FARMGATE and other U. S. air
units would join in. These "would continue despite negotiations, until
there was clear evidence that North Vietnam had stopped its subversion
of the South." The negotiating objectives would be to obtain both agree-
ment and evidence that (1) “terrorism, armed attacks, and armed resis-
tance stop" and (2) "commmications on the networks out of the North are
conducted entirely in uncoded form." 78/

Presented along with the scenario were assessments of likely communist
reactions and the possible U. §. responses to these moves. The mose likely
military reactions to the scenario actions were seen as expanded insurgency
operations, including possible "sizeable infiltration" of North Vietnamese
ground forces, and a drive toward the Mekong by Pathet Lao and North Viet-
namese forces. The Soviet Union was expected to intensify its diplomatic
opposition to U. S. policies and China was expected to (1) augment North
Vietnamese air defense capabilities, and (2) successfully dissuade Hanoi
from any willingness (particularly after U. S. air operations began) to
reduce its support of the Viet Cong. To counter communist reactions, the
proposal specified in each contingency that intensified operations against
North Vietnam would be the most effective option. In response to intensi-
fied insurgency, considered the least intense (though most likely) alterna-
tive available to the commmist powers, the proposal included provision
for augmenting South Vietnamese forces "by U. S. ground forces prepositioned
in South Vietnam or on board ship nearby."

The May 23, 1964 scenario read as follows: (Table 1)

"1, Stall off any ‘conference on /Laos or/ Vietnam until
D-Day.'

2. Intermediary (Canadian?) tell North Vietnam in general
terms that U.S. does not want to destroy the North Vietnam regime
(and indeed is willing ‘to provide a carrot'), but is determined
to protect South Vietnam from North Vietnam.

3. (D-30) Presidential speech in general terms launching
Joint Resolution.

4, (D-20) Obtain Joint Resolution epproving past actions
and authorizing whatever is necessary with respect to Vietnam.

22 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
