Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The disagreement was less veiled on the bombing:

¢....The Joint Chiefs of Staff do not concur in your
recommendation that there should be no increase in level of
bombing effort and no modification in areas and targets sub-
ject to air attack. They believe our air campaign against
NVN to be an integral and indispensable part of our over-all
war effort. To be effective, 'the air campaign should be con-
ducted with only those minimum constraints necessary to avoid
indiscriminate killing of population.'

Nor did they find the new organizational arrangements for pacifica-
tion especially appetizing:

d....The Joint Chiefs of Staff informed you earlier that,
to achieve early optimum effectiveness, the pacification pro-
gram should be transferred to COMUSMACV. They adhere to that
conclusion. However, if for political reasons a civilian-type
organization should be considered mandatory by the President,
they would interpose no objection. Nevertheless, they are not
sanguine that an effective civilian-type organization can be
erected, if at all, except at the expense of costly delays.
As to the use of a substantial fraction of the ARVN for paci-
fication purposes, the Joint Chiefs of Staff concur. However,
they desire to flag that adoption of this concept will undoubt-
edly elicit charges of a US takeover of combat operations at
increased cost in American casualties.

Finally, they did not share the Secretary's views on how to induce
negotiations. They believed the bombing was one "trump card" in the
President's hand and should not be surrendered without an equivalent
quid pro quo, such as "an end to the NVN aggression in SVN." The essence
of disagreement here centered around what each party, Secretary of Defense
and JCS felt was adequate return for a “trump,” the JCS believing that as
the military campaign wore on with “increasing success, the value of the
trump would become apparent." 55/

In this regard, the Chiefs seemed to sense that a significant turn
in our views about Vietnam had been taken in high policy circles of our
government. In final comment, they observed that the conflict had reached
a stage at which decisions taken over the next sixty days could determine
the outcome of the war, and therefore they wished to provide the President
with "their unequivocal views” on two salient aspects of the war situation:
the search for peace and military pressures on NVN.

The frequent, broadly-based public offers made by the
President to settle the war by peaceful means on a generous
basis, which would take from NVN nothing it now has, have
been admirable. Certainly, no one -- American or foreigner

gh | TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
