Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

many agreed with Komer's apprehensions. A widely circulated National
Intelligence Estimate, published shortly thereafter, detailed the fragile
nature of political development in South Vietnam, characterizing it as

"a day-to-day, month-to-month phenomenon for some time to come, with
periodic upheavals and erises /that will/ threaten the entire process." 19/

Despite a cautiously optimistic approach to the prospects for a more
Stable political situation, the same NIE identified serious potential
sources of instability in the small nation. It saw regionalism as a
factor whose influence might burgeon as political events quickened. The
military domination of the political life of the country remained an
explosive issue. Finally, United States presence and objectives remained
@ major consideration in analyzing the future behavior of the political
actors in South Vietnam. Confidence in the American commitment and stead-
fastness in our objectives could remain as a counterweight to disruptive
SVN political effects and could at least tentatively submerge the polit-
ically debilitating civilian-military rivalries, the bickering and
jockeying for influence from within and without. 20/

3. Fishing for Ideas With a Dragnet: The Abortive NSAM on

Strategic Guidelines for Vietnam

With the new year it was becoming increasingly clear that American
resolution, our massive presence and the determined pursuit of our objec-
tives in South Vietnam would heavily influence political events there, but
the nature of our objectives, the political bases of our resolution and
the desirable magnitude of our presence were less than clear. In an effort
to erystallize our thinking in these ereas and to provide some more care-
fully delineated guidance for operations, the President asked Walt Rostow
to float a draft NSAM embracing strategic guidelines for 1967 in Vietnam. 21/

The draft NSAM, too, in the Komer vein, was basically optimistic in
tone, opening with the observation that "skillful use of U.S. forces has
greatly improved our military position....it is imperative that we mount
and effectively orchestrate a concerted military, civil, and political
effort to achieve a satisfactory outcome as soon as possible." 22/ Accord-
ingly, the draft laid out our strategic aims in 1967. They were to:

"A. Maximize the prospects for a satisfactory outcome in
Vietnam by December 1967 or, if this is not possible, put us’
in the best position for the longer pull.

"B. Be equally suited to (a) forcing Hanoi to negotiate;
(b) weakening the VC/NVA to the point where Hanoi will opt to
fade away; or (c) at the minimum, making it patently clear to
all that the war is demonstrably being won.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
ie
