Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

E. DRV Strategy: Objectives and Timing

From the close of the Geneva Conference on 22 July 1954,
through Hanoi'’s announcement of the founding of the National Liberation
Front of South Vietnam on 29 January 1961, the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam appears to have passed through four distinct phases in striving
toward its national objectives of independence, reunification, assured
foreign support, and Vietnamese hegemony in Southeast Asia.

1. Political Struggle: Summer, 1954 -- Summer, 1956. In the
year following Geneva, the DRV executed its regroupments and pressed
hard towards land reform and economic recovery. In February, 1955, the
Malenkov clique fell from power in the USSR, and the Soviet Union came
under a collective leadership within which Khrushchev was pre-eminent.
Intimations that the new leaders were interested in pursuing a concilia-
tory policy in the Cold War distinctly at variance with the national
interests of the DRV were manifest in Soviet inaction when the deadlines
for consultations concerning the Geneva Plebiscite passed in July,

1955. 149/ Doubly disappointed that Diem was not overturned by the
sects, and that its principal ally seemed ill-disposed to back its

cause, the DRV maneuvered frenetically to precipitate a reconvening

of the Geneva Conference and to stymie Diem. U.S. intelligence was

aware of a directive passed down through Lao Dong Party channels in
August, 1955, for subordinates to struggle against the Americans and
Dien ".. . so that there may be a less dangerous administration that
will go to a conference with us." 150/ In September, 1955, the newly
created Fatherland Front brought.out its proposal for a confederation

of North and South Vietnam, coupled with assurances that in both entities
landlords would get free treatment. In South Vietnam in the same month,
on three occasions soldiers fired on crowds agitating for the Geneva
Plebiscite. 151/ Captured reports from Party field pberaore in South
Vietnam were pessimistic, containing predictions of "long, painful and
complex struggle," and reporting weaknesses such that "it is not time. . :
to meet the enemy." 152/

But within South Vietnam, Diem moved smoothly through his
own plebiscite ejecting Bao Dai, announced plans for a new constitution, and
proclaimed Ordinance No. 6 (11 January 1956), giving the GVN powerful
legal recourse against "struggle movements." And just as the flurry of
DRV diplomatic notes finally elicited help in the form of Chou En Iai's
letter of 26 January 1956, calling for a new Geneva Conference,
Khrushchev dropped the “de-Stalinization" bombshell: at the 20th Congress
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Khrushchev, in denigrating
Stalin, undermined the Soviet position as the fount of Communist inter-
national policy, and fractured the Communist Bloc. In April, 1956,
just after the United Kingdom issued a note castigating the DRV
for violation of the letter and spirit of the Geneva Accords, Khrushchev
committed the Soviet Union to "peaceful competition" with the West:

4S TOP SECRET - Sensitive
