Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

Geneva Conference to deal with the situation. But the Geneva Co-
Chairmen, the USSR and the UK, responded only by extending the functions
of the International Control Commission beyond its 1956 expiration date.
By early 1957, partitioned Vietnam was a generally accepted modus vivendi
throughout the international community. For instance, in January 1957,
the Soviet Union proposed the admission of both the GVN and the DRV to
the United Nations, the USSR delegate to the Security Council declaring
that "in Vietnam two separate States existed, which differed from one
another in political and economic structure. .. ." Thus, reunification
through elections became as remote a prospect in Vietnam as in Korea or
Germany. If the political mechanism for reunifying Vietnam in 1956
proved impractical, the blame lies at least in part with the Geneva con-
ferees themselves, who postulated an ideal political settlement incom-
patible with the physical and psychological dismemberment of Vietnam
they themselves undertook in July 1954.

But partition was not, as the examples of Korea and Germany demon-
strate, necessarily tantamount to renewed hostilities. The difference
was that in Korea and Germany international forces guarded the boundaries.
In Vietnam, the withdrawal of the French Expeditionary Corps prior to
the date set for elections in 1956 left South. Vietnam defenseless except
for such forces as it could train and equip with U.S. assistance. The
vague extending of the SEATO aegis over Vietnam did not exert the same
stabilizing influence as did NATO's Central Army Group in Germany, or the
United Nations Command in Korea. Moreover, neither East Germany nor
North Korea enjoyed the advantage of a politico-military substructure
within the object of its irredentism, as the Viet Minh residue provided
North Vietnam. The absence of deterrent force in South Vietnam invited
forceful reunification; the southern Viet Minh regroupees in the North
and their comrades in the South made it possible.

Pursuant to the "regroupment" provisions of the Geneva Accords,
some 190,000 troops of the French Expeditionary Corps, and 900,000
civilians moved from North Vietnam to South Vietnam; more than 100,000
Viet Minh soldiers and civilians moved from South to North. Both nations
thereby acquired minorities with vital interests in the outcome of the
Geneva Settlement. In both nations, the regroupees exerted an influence
over subsequent events well out of proportion to their numbers.

In North Vietnam, the DRV treated the southern regroupees from
the outset as strategic assets ~- the young afforded special schooling,
the able assigned to separate military units.

The southerners in the North, and their relatives in the South, formed,
with the remnants of the Viet Minh's covert network in South Vietnam, a
means through which the DRV might "struggle" toward reunification regard-
less of Diem's obduracy or U.S. aid for South Vietnam. These people kept
open the DRV's option to launch aggression without transcending a

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
