Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

by Lacouture and Devillers, the Viet Minh may have been seeking to capitalize
. On Mendes-France's reputation as a man of peace, and on the ongoing with-
drawal of French Union forces from the southern Delta. 15/ This Viet

Minh position underwent a drastic change by the middle of July; and the
change can be traced to a meeting between Chou En-lai and Ho Chi Minh at
Nanning mar the China-Vietnam border. According to CIA reports, Chou applied
pressure on Ho to accept a partition line much farther to the North, probably
the 17th or 18th parallel. 16/ Pham Van Dong's subsequent compromise posi-
tion indicating a willingness of the Viet Minh to discuss partition at

the ai parallel seems to have originated in the talks between Chou and

Ho, Ly,

The French, however, refused to budge from their opposition
even though Molotov argued that the 16th parallel represented a substantial
Viet Minh concession and demanded a French quid pro quo. 18/ The Soviet
delegate then came forward with a new proposal to draw the demarcation
line at the 17th. 19/ Precisely what motivated Molotov to make this pro-
posal is not clear. Speculatively, Molotov may simply have traded consider-
able territorial advantage to the French (much more than was warranted by
the actual Tonkin military situation) for some progress on the subject of
elections. The Western negotiators, at least, recognized this possibility:
Eden considered a line between the 17th and 18th parallels worth trading
for a mutually acceptable position on elections; 20/ and. Mendes-France
observed in a conversation with Molotov that the election and demarcation
questions might be linked in the sense that each side could yield on one
of the questions. 21/

e. Molotov Proposes Compromise on Elections

The French had consistently held out for general elections
in Vietnam, but without a time limit. (Election dates for Laos and Cam-
bodia were already set by their constitutions as August and September 1955,
respectively.) Molotov, however, reflected Viet Minh thinking in propos-
ing that a date be fixed, offering June 1955, but suggesting that elections
might be agreed upon for 1955 with the exact date to be decided between
Vietnamese and Viet Minh authorities. 22/ The Chinese proved much more
flexible. In a talk with a member of the British delegation, Li K'o-nung
argued for a specific date, but said his government was willing to set it
within two or three years of the cease-fire. 23/ Once again, the compro-
mise was worked out on Molotov's initiative. At a meeting on 19 July
attended by Eden, Mendes-France, Chou, and Dong, Molotov drew the line at
two years. 2h/ In view of the DRV demand for six months, the French com-
promise position of 18 months, and. the Soviets' own one-year plan, the
West had good reason to accept Molotov's offer.

f. DRV is Pressed to Give Up Claims for Pathet Lao and Free Khmer
Representation

A third instance in which Viet Minh ambitions were cut short
by the diplomatic intrusion of their comrades concerned the status of the

C-23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
