Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(3) During US FY 67 USG will make available et least
$350 million of grant aid for imports, not including
PL 480 Title 1 Commodities. Any portion of the $350
million not required for such imports will be used
during the US FY 67 as grant assistance for economic
development projects.

(4) Within the balance of payments accounts, the amounts
or categories to be financed by each of the governments
will be determined through joint consultation on a quar-
terly basis. 9/

The putting of GVN dollar reserves into US two-year or longer-term
bonds would technically improve the US balance of payments, though the
gain would be more nominal than real. The agreement left plenty of room
for further problems and State recognized that each item would probably
have to be pressed again. 10/

Following this agreement, the Embassy prepared to negotiate a GVN
budgetary ceiling and related matters. The strategy would be to seek
agreement on a firm budget ceiling for GVN without committing the USG on
its spending in Vietnem. But the Embassy had misgivings about this
approach:

-.elt deprives US of the monetary gap analysis as a hinge
on which stabilization agreements cen be hung...Note that
Komer-Hanh memorandum signed in Washington used 10 Billion
gap figure as objective.

GVN officials are anxious to resume discussions. Prime
Minister now has on his desk proposed GV CY 67 budget of
100 billion piasters. The differences between that figure
and acceptable one is much greeter than the differences in
US ceiling estimates last discussed here during McNamara's
visit. aA

State cabled its agreement that showing GV the US plan to limit its own
piaster spending would hel» get GVN to accept tight ceilings itself. 12/

In December, Embassy negotiators tried to pin down GVii on the means
to limit its accumulation of dollar balances, talking mainly with Governor
Hanh. To evade specific commitment, he repeatedly talked as though he
could not determine GYN budget policy (which he had negotiated in Washing-
ton two months before} and that he could not as a good banker make the
pookkeeping transactions that would be required to permit GV to rim them
down by buying imports. The Embassy negotiators then turned to the idea
of asking for a GVN contribution of 8 billion piasters to the Free World
Forces’ operating budget in Vietnam as a cost-sharing arrangement, which
would incidentally reduce GVN's receipts of dollars and so help run dow
the balances. GVil's reply was that that was impossible. After a series

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
