Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

th the fall of 1954 they attacked Quemoy and Matsu, the same two
islands they are attacking now. They broke off that attack when, in
January 1955, the Congress and I agreed that we should firmly support
Free China.

"Since then, for about four years, Chinese Communists have not
used force for aggressive purposes. We have achieved an armistice in
Korea which stopped the fighting there in 1953. There is a 1951 armis-
tice in Viet Nam; and since 1955 there has been quiet in the Formosa
Straits area. We had hoped that the Chinese Communists were becoming
peaceful--but it seems not.

"So the world is again faced with the problem of armed aggression.
Powerful dictatorships are attacking an exposed, but free, area.

"What should we do?

"Shall we take the position that, submitting to threat, it is
better to surrender pieces of free territory in the hope that this
will satisfy the appetite of the aggressor and we shall have peace?

"Do we not still remember that the name of 'Munich' symbolizes a
vain hope of appeasing dictators?

"At that time, the policy of appeasement was tried and it failed.
Prior to the second World War, Mussolini seized Ethiopia. In the Far
East, Japanese warlords were grabbing Manchuria by force. Hitler sent
his armed forces into the Rhineland in violation of the Versailles
Treaty. Then he annexed little Austria. When he got away with that,
he next turned to Czechoslovakia and began taking it, bit by bit.

"In the face of all these attacks on freedom by the dictators, the
powerful democracies stood aside. It seemed that Ethiopia and Manchuria
were too far away and too unimportant to fight about. Im Europe, appease-
ment was looked upon as the way to peace. The democracies felt that if
they tried to stop what was going on, that would mean war. But because
of these repeated retreats, war came just the same.

"Tp the democracies had stood firm at the beginning, almost surely
there would have been no World War. Instead they gave such an appearance
of weakness and timidity that aggressive rulers were encouraged to over-
run one country after another. In the end the democracies saw that their
yery survival was at stake. They had no alternative but to turn end fight
in what proved to be the most terrible war that the world has ever known.

"T know something about that war, and I never want to see that his-
tory repeated. But, my fellow Americans, it certainly can be repeated
if the peace-loving democratic nations again fearfully practice 4 policy
of standing idly by while big aggressors use armed force to conquer the
small and weak.

B-37
