Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

with the strength of character of Diem, at least in fighting
communists. Certainly there are no Generals qualified to
take over in my opinion.

T em not a Diem man per se. I certainly see the faults
‘in his character. I am here to back 14 million SVN people in
their leader at this time.

OR RE

I would suggest we not try to change horses too quickly.
That we continue to take persuasive actions that will make
the horses change their course and methods of action. That
we win the military effort as quickly as possible, then let
them make any and @11 the changes they want.

After all, rightly or wrongly, we have backed Diem for
eight long hard years. To me it seems incongruous now to get
him down, kick him around, and get rid of him. The US has
been his mother superior and father confessor since he's been
in office and he has leaned on us heavily. 58/

The first Washington message to Lodge on October 30 revealed that
White House anxiety about the possible failure of a coup attempt,
already evident on October 25 in CAP 63590 (see Appendix), hed increased.59/
The CIA's evaluation of the balance of forces cast doubt on whether the coun
group could pull off a decisive action. 60/ With these concerns in mind,
Washington could not accept Lodge's judgment "that no positive action by
the USG can prevent a coup attemp..." 61/ The White House view was that;

-+.Our attitude to coup group can still have decisive
effects on its decisions. We believe that what we say to
coup group can produce delay of coup and that betrayal of
coup plans to Diem is not repeat not our only way of stopp-

ing coup. 62/

In a long reply (in which Harkins did not concur), Lodge was at pains to
point out his powerlessness to prevent what was fundamentally a Vietnamese
affair, short of revealing it to the palace.

We must, of course, get best possible estimate of chance
of coup's success and this estimate must color our thinking,
but do not think we have the power to delay or discourage 4
coup. Don has made it clear many times that this is a Viet-
nemese affair. It is theoretically possible for us to turn
over the information which has been given to vs in confidence
to Diem and this would undoubtedly stop the coup and would
make traitors out of us, For practical purposes therefore I

48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
