Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
“Security Information

government. There may be individual cases, but one can-
not draw conclusions from them about the good faith of
the French. The French generals are not more stupid
than other generals, and they want victories and know
that their only hope are the native armies, and the key
to that is confidence in and fairness to the Vietnamese.

He had the feeling that the operational plan discussed
in Washington seemed convincing to the people he saw
there and that not much else could be done. The solution
seemed reasonable and if the plan were put into effect
the only problem would be financial. It was felt that
Congress would find it acceptable. It remains capable
of execution even today, The Laos affair is unpleasant
but it should not interfere with the development of the
Vietnamese forces.

SECRETARY DULLES replying to M. Pleven's second
question, said it would be the hope of the Executive
Branch of the U.S. government -- we can at the present
time speak only of recommendations to Congress ~- that
if there is a program for Indochina which has the endorse-
ment of our military advisers, which has a chance of
success, would propose a fighre comparable to $525 million
for this year and there are circumstances where we might
possibly increase that a little bit. However, that
would have to be a program where we could in effect say
to Congress; This program has enough chance or success
that if you invest a certain amount for a certain time,
it will largely clear up the situation -- not, as
M. Letourneau has pointed out, in terms of actual victory
but by reducing the dimensions similar to those in Malaya
or with the Huks in the Philippines. Then there was the
question whether we do that if the French reduce their
over-all military expenditure. That would mean that
we assume a larger percentage of the total rather than
an increase. Some slight adjustment may not be impossible
but we felt that 1t would not be very practicable to do
that on a scale that our people felt the French had
run out and we were holding the bag.

Security Information

30
