Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

programs the Army did not have the capability of providing divisional
forces for operations in Indochina while maintaining its existing commit-
ments in Europe and the Far East. Army also suggested a "reevaluation
of the importance of Indochina and Southeast Asia in relation to the

possible cost of saving it.”

With the deterioration of the French military situation in
Indochina, the first serious attention came to be given to the manner and
size of a U.S. intervention. The question to be faced was: how far was
the U.S. prepared to go in terms of force commitments to ensure that
Indochina stayed out of Communist hands? The Defense Department, though
not of a single mind on this question, pressed for an early determination
ef the forces the U.S. would be willing to dispatch in an emergency
situation. The Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Robert Anderson,
proposed to Secretary of Defense Wilson on January 6, 1954, that the
U.S. decide immediately to employ combat forces in Indochina on the
"reasonable assurance of strong indigenous support of our forces,"
whether or not the French Government approved. 4/ But Vice Admiral A. C.
Davis, Director of the Office of Foreign Military Affairs in OSD , wrote:

", . e Involvement of U.S. forces in the Indochina war
should be avoided at all practical costs. If, then, National
Policy determines no other alternative, the U.S. should not
be self-duped into believing the possibility of partial
involvement -- such as 'Naval and Air units only.’ One cannot
go over Niagara Falls in a barrel only slightly.”

Admiral Davis then went on:

"Conment: If it is determined desireble to introduce
air and naval forces in combat in Indochina it is difficult
to understand how involvement of ground forces could be avoided.
Air strength sufficient to be of worth in such an effort would
require bases in Indochina of considerable magnitude. Pro-
tection of those bases and port facilities would certainly
require U.S. ground force personnel, and the force once com-
mitted would need ground combat units to support any threatened
evacuation. It must be understood that there is no cheap way
to fight a war, once committed.”

b. NSC: State and Defense Views

The evident disparity between, on the one hand, our high
strategic valuation of Indochina, and on the other, our unwillingness
to reach a firm decision on the forces required to defend the area became
the subject of the NSC's 179th meeting on January 8, 1954. At this
meeting the Council discussed NSC 177 on Southeast Asia, 6/ but it decided
not to take up the Special Annex to NSC 177 which laid out a series of
choices which might face the United States if the French military position
in Indochina continued to deteriorate. Nevertheless, the NSC at that time
did make some headway on the problem it had posed for itself.

B-6 TOP. SECRET - Sensitive
