Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

as they clearly felt they were winning. In order to offset the increases
of uS/3rd Country forces in South Vietnam, the Communists would probably

- build up their own strength with the input of 20,000 to 30,000 PAVN regu-

lars by the end of 1965. This, of course, they were already in the pro-
cess of doing.

It was seen as possible, but less probable, that the Communists
might attack GVN forces and installations in hopes of achieving victory
before the US/3rd Country build-up took effect. Barring that, they might
avoid direct confrontation with U.S. forces and just peck away at them
through harassing actions. By so doing, they might hope to demonstrate
to the foreigner his own impotence in a Vietnamese war.

If the situation in South Vietnam were going badly for the VC,
the DRV might show some interest in negotiations.. If the U.S. did in-
crease its air activity, the DRV was most likely te respond by asking
the Soviets for more air defense hardware.

As far as the Chinese Communists were concerned, it was estimated
that they were very unlikely to intervene in the air war over North
Vietnem. They might put service troops into North Vietnam, but they
would not be likely to introduce combat troops. The Chinese, the Estimate
said, "would believe that the U.S. measures were sufficient only to post-
pone defeat while magnifying its eventual effect."

It could be expected that the Soviets would step up their aid to
the DRV, especially in the field of air defense, and at the same time
harden their attitude towards the U.S. without making any major challenge
to U.S. interests around the world. It would come as no.surprise if the
Soviets raised the level of their military spending in response to this
U.S. action.

It was felt that most of the allies of the United States realized
that the U.S. was going to have to increase its commitment in Vietnam.
It was recognized, however, that they would find it increasingly difficult
to give U.S. policy any public support.

In order to mitigate somewhat the crisis atmosphere that would
result from this major U.S. action, the Estimate concluded with the recom-
mendation that announcements about it be made piecemeal with no more high

level emphasis than necessary.

Predictably, the expectations of thos2= outside of the official
pale ran the gamut from supporters of Oregon Senator Wayne Morse ("the
Administration policy is leading the United States to the abyss of total
war" -- "there are doubts beginning to show at the grass roots about our
policy there, fin Vietnam/ and when the coffins begin coming home those
doubts will grow" -- "the war in Asia cannot be won; ...in the end the
United States will be kicked out") 184/ to equally misguided zealots on

122 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
