Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

action in resorting to military measures, first slowly and then by the
stepped-up infiltration beginning in 1959 and 1960.

"The facts, are quite otherwise. The Eisenhower administration
had fully supported the principle of free elections under international
supervision, in Viet-Nam as in other situations where a country was
divided, Korea and Germany.

"A similar position was taken by President Diem of South Viet-Nam. ~.
For example, in January 1955 Diem made it clear to an American corres-
pondent that:

"The clauses providing for the 1956 elections are extremely
vague. But at one point they are clear--in stipulating that the elec-
tions are to be free. Everything will now depend on how free elections
are defined. The President said he would weit to see whether the con-—
ditions of freedom would exist in North Viet-Nam at the time scheduled
for the elections. He asked what would be the good of an impartial
counting of votes if the voting had been preceded in North Viet-Nam by
the ruthless propaganda and terrorism on the part of a police state.'

"Tt do not think any of us would dissent from this description of
whet is required for free elections. And the simple fact is thet, when
the issue arose concretely in 1956, the regime in Hanoi--while it kept
ealling for elections in its propaganda--made no effort to respond to
the call of the Soviet Union and Great Britain, as cochairmen of the
1954 Geneva conference, for the setting up of the appropriate machinery
for free elections.

"The reason is not far to seek. For North Viet-Nam in 1956--and
indeed today--is a Communist state and in 1956 North Viet-Nam was in
deep trouble. Its own leaders admitted as much in their party congress

in the fall of 1956 in a statement by General [Wo Nguyen/ Giap referring
as widespread terror, failure to respect the principles of feith and
worship in the so-called land reform ‘program, the use of torture as a
normal practice, and a whole list of excesses which even the Communists
had come to realize went too far.

"So the answer is, I repeat, simple. There was no chance of free
elections in North Viet-Nam in 1956. We shall wait to see whether there
will ever be such a chance in the future.

"Second, there is the myth that the Viet Cong movement has any
significant relationship to the political oppcsition to President Dien.
I have referred already to the unfortunate trends that developed after
1959 in President Diem's rule. There was unquestionably opposition to
him within South Viet-Nam, and that opposition included many distinguished
South Vietnamese, some of whom went into exile as a result. Others
stayed in Saigon, and some were imprisoned.

D-43
