Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

revolutionary's entire mature life. 58/ His main obstacles, as he saw
them, were first France, then a Franco-American combine, and finally the
U.S. alone; toward the expulsion of U.S. power and influence from Vietnam
Ho, after 1954, directed most of the international power of the DRV. 59/
Nonetheless, while Ho's testimony is extensive on his deep antipathy to
U.S. imperialism as the major danger to the DRV, his behavior in the
Chinese-Russian rivalry indicated that he perceived yet another serious
threat to Vietnamese independence in his northern neighbor: China,
ancient overlord of the Viet peoples. 60/ Accordingly, the foreign policy
of the DRV, though pivoted upon anti-Americanism, has guarded against
encroachment by the Communist Chinese.

As an upper limit on reasonable expectations after 1954, the
DRV might have hoped, in the context of a worsening political climate
within South Vietnam, or of some form of plebescite per the Geneva Settle-
ment, that foreign military forces would be withdrawn from the South and
foreign influence attenuated. A Franco-American withdrawal could have
acceptably taken place under a neutralization formula, provided that the
formula permitted pursuit of other DRV policies, such as reunification, and
socialization.

Minimally, the DRV might have been willing to accept a con-
tinued foreign presence in the south, especially a French presence, with
assurance of eventual withdrawal, and compensatory concessions to the
DRV on the issue of reunification.

In the literal sensé, the DRV won its independence at the
Geneva Conference of 1954, as attested by Pravda upon the close of the
Conference, July 22, 1954: "the freedom-loving oving peoples of Indo-China...have
won their national tdenendences" In January, 1957, the Soviet UN delegate
requested entry of the DRV into the UN as a separate, distinct state, as
it then existed in North Vietnam. 61/ But Ho Chi Minh, also on 22 July
1954, issued an appeal stressing the temporary nature of the partition,
and the impermanence of the French military presence in the South. More-
over, he said: "North, Central and South Vietnam are territories of ours.
Our country will certainly be unified, our entire people will surely be
liberated." 62/ By 1957 the bar to independence and unification, the
baleful foreign presence in Vietnem was plainly, in Ho's view, the US:

"The Vietnamese people have perseveringly carried on the
struggle for the implementation of the Geneva Agreement to
reunify the country, because South Viet~Nam is still ruled by
the US imperialists and their henchmen. In completely liberated
North Viet-Nam, power is in the hands of the people; this is a
firm basis for the peaceful reunification of Viet-Nam, a task
which receives ever-growing and generous help from the Soviet
Union, China, and other brother countries. Thanks to this
assistance, the consolidation of the North has scored good
results." 63/

21. TOP SECREP ~ Sensitive
