Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The statistical picture presented above of an insurgent: force declining
in numbers from 1954 through 1959, and then mushrooming rapidly in 1960
and thereafter, is obviously misleading. What U.S. intelligence focused
on in the immediate aftermath of Geneva were the remnants of the Viet
Minh military force following the regroupment. These, whatever their
strength, probably represented only a fraction of the numbers of former
Viet Minh in active opposition to the GVN after 1956, and apparently did
not reflect the total numbers of armed dissidents from 1957 onward, nor
the locally recruited political and logistic apparatus which supported
the Viet Cong "armed propaganda teams," or guerrilla bands. The phenom-
enal growth of the Viet Cong, given the low estimates on infiltration
from North Vietnam (some 5,000 through 1960), means either than the

DRV cadres were extraordinarily effective in organizing and motivating
rural people among whom U.S. intelligence detected little unrest through
mid-1960, or that U.S. estimates were low. The latter seems probable.

Much of what the United States knows now about the origins
of the insurgency in South Vietnam rests on information it has acquired
since 1963, approximately the span of time that an extensive and effective
American intelligence apparatus had been functioning in Vietnam. Before
then, our intelligence was drawn from a considerably more narrow and
less reliable range of sources, chiefly Vietnamese, and could not have
supported analysis in depth of insurgent organization and intentions. It
is surprising, therefore, that from 1954 to 1960 U.S. intelligence estimates
at the national level correctly and consistently estimated that the threat
to GVN internal security was greater than the danger from overt invasion.
They pegged the Viet Cong general offensive 4s beginning in late 1959,
with some preparations noted as early as 1957. In general, they were
critical of Diem, consistently expressing skepticism that he could thread
his way through recognized internal political difficulty. To be sure,
the same estimates misjudged the numerical and political strength of the
Viet Cong, the extent of popular disaffection, and miscalculated the
ability of the GVN to cope with the Viet Cong. But as strategic intelli-
gence, U.S. estimates were remarkably sound.

B. U.S. Policy and Programs, 1954-1960

U.S. national policy statements of the period, in the records of
the National Security Council, did not exactly reflect U.S. intelligence
in treating insurgency as the GVN's primary threat. U.S. "counterinsurgency”
policy--though not so termed until 1960--prozeeded from the premise that
U.S. national interests required the U.S. to provide political support,
economic aid, and military assistance to the GVN to preclude its domina-
tion by communists. The policy governing in the immediate aftermath of
Geneva was laid out in NSC 5405 and 5429/5 of 1954. On July 11, 1956,
the Operations Coordinating Board published a "Progress Report" on the
programs directed by these two policy papers, noting among "major problems
or areas of difficulty” that: ;

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
