128.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive _

effective and allow it to cope with increasing number of V.C., it must

be given greater mobility. Such mobility can come from two sources, (1)
freeing Army from static missions end (2) making available to it improved
means of transport, notably helicopters and light aircraft. Both

methods shovld be considered.

D. Blocking infiltration into high plateau: increase in
enemy forces in high plateau requires special measures for defense and
for counter-guerrille actions. It is suggested that a carefully tailored
"porder ranger force" be organized from existing ranger units and intro-
duced into the difficult terrain along the Laos/Vietnam frontier for
atteck and defense against the Viet Cong. This force should be trained
and equipped for extended service on the frontier and for operations
against the communications lines of the VC who have infiltrated into the
high plateau and adjacent areas.

E. Introduction of U.S. Military Forces: GVN is faced with
mejor civil problem arising from flood devastation in western provinces.
Its allies should offer help to GVN according to their means. In the
case of U.S., two ways of rendering help should be considered. One is
of emergency type, such as offer of U.S. military helicopters for
reconnaissance of conditions of flooded areas and for emergency delivery
medical supplies and like. A more significant contribution might be
a flood relief task force, largely military in composition, to work with
GVN over an extended period for rehabilitation of area. Such a force
might contain engineer, medical, signal, and transportation elements as
well as combat troops for the protection of relief operations. Obviously,
such a military source would also provide U.S. military presence in
Viet Nam and would constitute military reserve in case of heightened
military crisis.

F, Actions to emphasize national emergency and beginning of
a new phase in the war: we should consider jointly ell possible measures
to emphasize turning point has been reached in dealing with Communist
aggression. Possible actions might include appeal to United Nations, an
announcement by GVN of governmental changes to cope with crisis and ex-
change of letters between the two heads of State expressing their partner-
ship in a common cause.

3. Diem's reaction on all points was favorable. He expressed satis-
faction with idea of introducing U.S. forces in connection with flood
relief activities, observing that even the opposition elements in this
Congress had joined with the majority in supporting need for presence of
U.S. forces. In the course of the meeting, nothing was formally proposed
or approved but the consensus was that the points considered might form
framework for a program of increased GVN-US cooperation offering promise
of overcoming many of the current difficulties of GVN. There were no
specific figures discussed with regard to such matters as troop strengths,
additional equipment, or flood relief...

93
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
