Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ho, Statement by Secreta Rusk Before the Senate Committee on
Foreign Relations, February 18, 1966, "The U.S. Commitment in
Viet-Neam: Fundamental Issues Broadcast Live on Nationwide

Television Networks); Department of State Bulletin, March 7, se
p. 346.

te ee

“Why are we in Viet-Nam? Certainly we are not there merely
because we have power and like to use it. We do not regard ourselves
as the policeman of the universe. We do not go around the world look-
ing for quarrels in which we can intervene. Quite the contrary. We
have recognized that, just as we are not gendarmes of the universe,
neither are we the magistrate of the universe. If other governments,
other institutions, or other regional organizations can find solutions
to the quarrels which disturb the present scene, we are anxious to
have this occur. But we are in Viet-Nam because the issues posed
there are deeply intertwined with our own security and because the
outcome of the struggle can profoundly affect the nature of the world
in which we and our children will live."

i, LE

"What are our world security interests involved in the struggle
in Viet-Nam?

"They cannot be seen clearly in terms of Southeast Asia only or
merely in terms of the events of the past few months. We must view
the problem in perspective. We must recognize that what we are seek-
ing to achieve in South Viet-Nem is part of a process that has continued
for a long time--a process of preventing the expansion and extension of
Communist domination by the use of force against the weaker nations on
the perimeter of Communist power. :

"This is the problem as it looks to us. Nor do the Communists
themselves see the problem in isolation. They see the struggle in
South Viet-Nam as part of a larger design for the steady extension of
Communist power through force and threat."

7 ke -/ We

"But the Communist world has returned to its demand for what it
calls a ‘world revolution,’ a world of coercion in direct contradiction
to the Charter of the United Nations. There may be differences within
the Communist world about methods, and techniques, and leadership within
the Communist world itself, but they share a common attachment to their
‘world revolution’ and to its support through what they call ‘wars of
liberation.'
