Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

BLT's was only two weeks away. Moreover, the usual flood of documentation
preceding a decision of significance is not to be found. In other words,
it appears that the key decision-makers in Washington are not focusing ~
hard on the importance of the deployment. The attention-getter, as the
Bundy memo indicates, was the impending air war against North Vietnam.

“The significance of the Marine BLT deployment must also be measured
up to the objectives intended by the deployment. There were four dis-
tinguishable rationales: i

(1) Freeing ARVN forces from static defense to base security;

(2) Providing added security for U.S. air bases being used in the
air war against North Vietnam;

(3) Signaling Hanoi with increased U.S. determination to pay a
higher price in meeting its commitments; and

(4) Bolstering GVN morale.

The first objective was the one most stressed publicly -- to release
RVNAF for offensive action against the Viet Cong. General Westmoreland
cabled the JCS on 22 February saying that the deployment of the Marines
to Da Nang would result ultimately in freeing four RF companies, one tank
platoon, and another RF battalion then being formed. 59/ The MACV
Monthly Evaluation of March 1965 stated that only two RF companies had in
fact been released. 60/ It is apparent, then, that this objective could
not have been taken very seriously. While it can be argued that any slight
improvement in the local force ratios vis-a-vis the Viet Cong was desir-
able; even the most optimistic prediction of releasable RVNAF units would
not have had much importance.

A second rationale was the notion of security for a major U.S. air
base being used in bombing operations against North Vietnam. Da Nang
was exposed and the probability of a Viet Cong attack on it could not
be ignored. While the two Marine BLT deployment, by itself, was recog-
nized as being insufficient for high level of confidence about base
security, there can be little doubt that U.S. troops did make that im-
portant base more secure. In retrospect, it could be construed that this
was the first sign of U.S. awareness of RVNAF inadequacy. There is,
however, no documentary evidence available to support this view and, in
fact, the real extent of this ineffectiveness was not recognized wmtil.a
few months later.

A third obj:ctive may have been to signal Hanoi with the seriousness
of the U.S. resolve in Vietnam. Notwithstanding the relatively minute
combat power imposed in two battalions, the very fact that they were de-
ployed would be a much clearer sign to Hanoi of U.S. determination in the
fleeting appearance of a few jet aircraft or the shadowy presence off-
shore of 4 mighty fleet of shins. Taken in conjunction with the well-
known U.S. shibboleth against involvement in a major Asian land war, the

eal TOP SECRET - Sensitive
