Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. There is a distinct difference between the North
Vietnam that existed in early 1965 and the North Vietnam
of today. The difference is a direct r2sult of the material
aid received from external sources and the ability to
accommodate to limited and sporadic air strikes. The Hanoi
regime throughout the air campaign has not shown a change
in national will, but outwardly displays a determination to
continue the war. The viability of the North Vietnam mili-
tary posture results from the availability of adequate
assets received from communist countries which permits
defense of the homeland and support of insurgency in the
South. 36/

To make the air campaign effective in its objectives in the months ahead,
the Chiefs recommended modification of the existing regulations. The
campaign they had in mind and the changes in present policy required for
it were as follows:

4, A coordinated and sustained air campaign could
hamper severely the North Vietnam war effort and the
continued support of aggression throughout Southeast
Asia. An integrated interdiction campaign should be
undertaken against the road, rail and waterway lines
of communication with the objective of isolating the
logistics base of Hanoi and Haiphong from each other and
from the rest of North Vietnam. To achieve this objective,
the following tasks must be performed employing a properly
palanced weight of effort:

a. Destroy war supporting facilities as well as
those producing items vital to the economy.

b. Attack enemy defenses in order to protect
our strike forces, destroy enemy gun crews and weapons,
and force the expenditure of munitions.

ce. Conduct air attacks throughout as large an
area and as continuously as possible in order to destroy
lines of communication targets and associated facilities,
dispersed material and supplies and to exert maximum
suppression of normal activities because of the threat.

d. Attack and destroy railroad rolling stock,
vehicles and waterborne logistics craft throughout as
large an area as possible, permitting minimum sanctuaries.

5. Targeting eriteria for the effective accomplish-

ment of 2 systematic air campaign would continue to
preclude the attack of population as a target, but accept

174 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
