Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(d) A great expansion of the US advisory structure,
especially with RF/PF;

(e) Increased training for ARVN;

(f) Increase RVNAF pay, housing, rations and other
incentives; push for a better promotion policy;

(g) Improve RVNAF equipment." 16/ =

On the same day, 24 April, Robert Komer, upon his departure from
Washington for Saigon submitted a memo to the President in which he
presented his thoughts on future strategy in Vietnam. He began by
lamenting the emergence of a tendency on the part of the United States
to resort in our frustration to actions in Vietnam which we could control,
e.g. bombing operations, U.S. ground force operations in lieu of what he
termed "the much tougher, slower and less certain measures required to
make the Vietnamese pull their weight." Le/ He recommended that we re-
examine trade-offs for making the Vietnamese do their part because, in his
estimation, measures which had been previously rejected looked a great
deal more appealing now when matched against the potential alternatives
of major troop increases or a widened bombing offensive. He concluded
that the critical variable in the equation for success in Vietnam during
the following 12-18 months was the conflict in the South. He saw the VC as
the "weak sister" of the enemy team; in fact, he believed that the NVA
strategy in I Corps was designed to take pressure off the VC in the south.
Then he addressed ways to maximize the chances of a breakthrough in the
South:

"Therefore, if we could maximize the pressures of all
kinds on the VC--direct and indirect--political, economic,
psychological and military--we might at the optimum force
Hanoi to fade away, or at the minimum achieve such success
as to make clear to all that the war was being won. Such a
course would also reinforce the pressures for negotiation.
But if we can't get a settlement in 12-18 months, at the
least we should shoot for such concrete results in South
Vietnam that it might permit us to start bringing a few
troops home rather than sending ever more out.

"T confess here to a strong bias that we are already
winning the war in the South. Wo one who compares the situ-
ation today to that of April 1966 (much less April 1965)
can deny we're doing better. But many contend we've just
stopped losing, not started winning. Much depends on one's
confidence in our 0/B estimates, which I for one flatly
question--especially with regard to VC recruiting rates
and losses in the South. Much also depends on how much
weight one gives to political trends, changing popular

7) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
