Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Vietnamese government invited the French to join in a campaign
against "enemies of the peace." The French, recognizing in the Lien
Viet their sole Vietnamese support, willingly acceded.

One of the more remarkable chapters in the tragic history of Viet-
namese nationalism then ensued. On the heels of the withdrawing Chinese,
Vo Nguyen Giap's DRV troops struck into the regions governed by the
Dong Minh Hoi, VNQDD, and Phuc Quoc. In a series of skirmishes, they
routed the partisan bands, and overturned the civil administrations of
the opposition parties. The French not only provided equipment, but in
some instances actually maneuvered their own forces with, and furnished
artillery support for, the Vietnamese. Some strongholds held out for
months -- Jao Kay on the Yunnan border remained in VN@DD hands until
November, 1946 -~- but the issue was decided before the end of July. 52/

On July 11 to 13, in a series of raids in Hanoi, DRV forces with
French armor in support occupied the opposition party headquarters and
printing plants, and arrested over 100 political figures. With that,
most of the opposition leaders returned to exile in China whence they
had come less than a year before. Among these were Nguyen Hai Than of
the Dong Minh Hoi -- Ho's Vice President -- and Vu Khong Kanh and Nguyen
Tuong of the VNQDD -~- the former one of the three signatories of the
March 6 Accord, the latter Ho's Minister of foreign Affairs and one of
the negotiators of the Accord.

The U.S. Vice Consul in Hanoi submitted the following report to the
Department of State concerning the political situation at that juncture:

"Please pass to General Marshall for information.
"There are three important political parties in Viet Nam.

"They are Viet Minh League, composed of former Indo-Chinese
Comunist Party (PCI dissolved itself November 30, 1945) ana
Democratic Party, son [sic] Vietnam Cach Menh Dong Minh Hoi,
generally referred to as Dong Minh Hoi or DMH; and Vietnam Quoc
Dan Dang.

"There are in addition several splinter parties which seem to

serve chiefly as vehicles for organized banditry.
| ,

"Both Dong Minh Hoi and Quoc Dan Dang seem have support of
Chinese. Most active part of Viet Minh is factor composed of
former, PCI members.

|

“Viet Minh strength seems to be spread throughout northern

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-18
