Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The question was raised whether the Prench mission in Hanoi was
in fact newotinting with Ho Chi Minh. General Gallagher replied
that the Vier Minh Provisional Government was at first willing to
negotiate; then in October, after de Gaulle’s” prenouncenients on

Gen, Charfes de Gawlle, President of the Previsional Government of the
Republic of France until Jauuary 26.

colonial policy, the Annamese refused to negotiate with the French
and reacted vigorously against all French nationals in Hanoi. The
Chinese may succeed in patting ina less anti-French Annamese gov-
ernment so that negotiation might go forward. All French efforts
to stimulate a palace revolution against Tlo were of no avail. IIo
himself will not deal with the French. The Viet Minh 's strong and,
regardless of possible senerfcial changes in the Provisional Govern-
ment, Ho will be behind eny continnine Annamese morement,
Genral Gallacher said that Sainteny had told him he expected peaceful
agreement hetween the French and the Annamese w ould be reached
by »eentintion.

General Gallagher was acked how effective the Viet Minh admin-
istration would be with neither French nor Chinese forces present.
He replied that on the whele be was impressed by the remarkably
effective Annamese administration. There was an able personnel;
they were all enthrsiastic and verne, but there were too few of them.
Whatever the r techniea’ skill. they perhans lack executive ability and
experience since the technical services in Hanoi were at first very well
run but eradunlly deteriorated Trained people for the government
and at the municipal level are lack*ne. In General Gallacher’s opin-
ion the \nnamese are not yet ready for self-goverpment and in full-
fledged comnetition with other vations they would “lose their shirts”.
However. the demand for indenendence is widesnread and even in
the villages the peasants refer to the example of the Philippines.

Ho is willing to ceonerate with Greet Britain. SSR. or the Tnited
States and would perhaps even settle fer French tuielage if that were
subordinated to control by the other nations. French control alone,
however, will be strongly resisted, The deep-seated hatred for the
French has been fanned by exceedinely clever Vier Minh pronneenda.

General Gallagher was asked whether the Annamese were realistic
regirding their ability to stand up against French military force.
While they are too enthusinstic and teo naive, he said, they probably
know thet they will be licked. They are strone on parades and re-
iterate their willingness “to fielit te the last man”, but they would be
slaughtered and they have been teld that and probably know it. The
Annimese would be no match fer forces with modern arms even if
they themselves have seme, which they may have since the Chinese
fonmd no Japanese rolling artillery and numerous Tanavese anti-
aircraft gins seem to have completely disappeared. United States
Army representatives never did leary: the extent of arms controlled by
the Viet Minh. Certainly the Chinese are not turning Japanese arms
over tothem. Before V—J Day the Jananese undonktedly had armed
and trained many Aunamese. A Japanese general claimed they had

taken over on March § simply beesnse the French could no longer con-
trol the Annaimese. but thisstatement General Gallacher characterized
asa lie. He had heard that rnder the pretext of arming .Annamese
gendarines for police duty in Hanoi. the Japanese had actually armed
three distinct contingents, disnissing each sroup when a7 aiied ane

CONFIDENTIAL
