Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

Similar representations were conveyed to the U.S. via Vietnamese in
Kunming (see the memorandum from General Donovan, Director of the 0.5.5.,
inclosed).

In October, warfare between Vietnamese and French forces began in
South Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh thereupon dispatched a series of communica-
tions to the U.S., to China, and to the other great powers, denying
France's right to speak on behalf of Vietnam in the U.N. or other inter-
national forums, and denouncing its "aggression" in Vietnam. Ho, in a
telegram on 17 October 1945, called President Truman's attention to the
"facts" that establishment of the U.N. Far East Advisory Commission over-
looked Vietnam membership, that France was not entitled to membership,
and that the DRV qualified for nation status under the Atlantic Charter.
Requesting the U.S. to convey his points to the United Nations, Ho
threatened that absence of Vietnam would bring forth instability in the
Far East. The telegram was referred from the White House to State which
duly noted "SEA considers that no action should be taken...." Within a
week, Ho Chi Minh appealed via Radio Hanoi to Truman, Attlee, and De Gaulle
and stated that the "Annamite Nationalist Government" intended to hold a
plebiscite to give a constitution to Indochina. (The French took the
view that they were not opposed to Ho per se, but wanted assurance that
Ho represented the entire population of Indochina.) Ho repeatedly referred
to President Truman's Navy Day address on foreign policy of 27 October
1945, and pleaded for application of its principles to Vietnam and the
DRV. ' In that speech, the President did not refer to Indochina in any
fashion, but the following passage evidently stirred Ho's hopes:

"The foreign policy of the United States is based firmly
on fundamental principles of righteousness and justice. In
carrying out those principles we shall firmly adhere to what we
believe to be right; and we shall not give our approval to any
compromise with evil.

"But we know that we cannot attain perfection in this world
overnight. We shall not let our search for perfection obstruct
our steady progress toward international cooperation. We must
be prepared to fulfill our responsibilities as best we can, within
the framework of our fundamental principles, even though we recog-
nize that we have to operate in an imperfect world.

"Let me restate the fundamentals of that foreign policy of
the United States:

"]. We seek no territorial expansion or selfish advantage.
We have no plans for aggression against any other state, large
or small. We have no objective which need clash with the peace-

ful i of any other nation.

"2. We believe in the eventual return of sovereign rights
and self-government to all peoples who have been deprived of them
by force.

c-60
