Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Senitive

the communications barrier between the two capitals. In San Antonio,
on September 29, the President delivered a long impassioned plea for
reason in Hanoi. The central function of the speech was to repeat
publicly the language of the negotiations proposal that had been trans-
mitted in August. The President led up to it in melodramatic fashion:

"twhy not negotiate now?’ so many ask me. The answer
is that we and our South Vietnamese allies are wholly pre-
pared to negotiate tonight. ,

"y am ready to talk with Ho Chi Minh, and other chiefs
of state concerned, tomorrow.

"T am ready to have Secretary Rusk meet with their
Foreign Minister tomorrow.

"T am ready to send a trusted representative of America
to any spot on this earth to talk in public or private with
a spokesman of Hanoi." 19/

Then he stated the U.S. terms for a bombing halt in their mildest form
to date:

As we have told Hanoi time and time and time again,
the heart of the matter is this: The United States is
willing to stop all aerial and naval bombardment of North
Vietnam when this will lead promptly to productive dis-
cussions. We, of course, assume that while discussions
proceed, North Vietnam would not take advantage of this
bombing cessation or limitation. 20

After the speech, the contacts in Paris presumably con-
tinued in an effort to illicit a positive response from Hanoi, but, in
spite of the continued restraint around Hanoi, none was apparently
forthcoming. The North Vietnamese objections to the proposal had shifted
it seems from the circumstances of its delivery to the substance of the
proposal itself. Instead of their earlier complaints about pressures
and ultimata, they now resisted the "conditions" of the San Antonio for-
mula -~ i.e. the U.S, desire for advance assurance,that "no advantage"
would be taken if the bombing were halted. Continued U.S. probing for
a response apparently reinforced the impression of "conditions." In
any case, on October 3, the San Antonio formulation was emphatically
rejected in the North Vietnamese party newspaper, Nham Dan, as a "faked
desire for peace" and "sheer deception." This was apparently confirmed
through the Paris channel in mid-October. in his press conference on
October 12, Secretary Rusk as much as said so when, after quoting the
President's offer, he stated:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
102 ae ae Ee a
