Ca
iy

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

saying he could get along with small force increases. Of course, he
added that such a force level would degrade his ability to meet time
deadlines ("it would be a longer war") but, as the 14 October DPM
clearly shows, the Secretary was thinking along different lines -- if
there was to be no quick, "successful" end to the war, why invest greater
resources and run greater political risks to get there -- still late.

The President returned from his highly publicized swing to Manila ;
and the Far East to find some press rumblings about the services exceeding
their budgeted FY 1967 strengths, and some speculation that the bombing
would increase; there had always been some change after such a trip. 62/
Richard Nixon had fired a final broadside in a belated attempt to heat up
the war issue for the election berating the President for making a trip
which "accomplished nothing" and which "resigned America and the free .
Asian nations to a war which could last five years and cost more casualties
than Korea." 63/ ‘These events notwithstanding, even though President
Johnson's administration was facing its first extensive national test
at the polls early in November, the Vietnam war was not a central public
issue. Basic uncertainty about how the electorate really felt about the
war, combined with the traditional wariness of old-line politicians in
bucking a "patriotic issue” had dampened some of the heat of the Vietnam
war as an issue. The only major race which focused on the war occurred
in Oregon, where Robert Duncan, an outspoken advocate of President Johnson's
VN policies, was defeated by what he described as “voter dissatisfaction with
the war." 6)/ :

The war itself seemed to cooperate with the Administration's efforts
to low-key the issue. Our forces were doing well in Operation HASTINGS
near the Cambodian border where, in the words of one commander, we ‘had
blunted the spearhead of the enemy winter offensive." 65/

The superficial quiet of an off-year election was in no way reflected
by the President's private activity upon his return from Manila. It was
budget time and he was wrestling with a war budget, featuring a whopping
supplemental of $9.1 billion for Vietnam prior to the beginning of FY 68.
Working out of the Texas ranch, the President generated a constant stream
of travelers from official Washington as he sought information, counsel,
and exposure. Secretary McNamara and General Wheeler made two trips to
the Pedernales, visiting the President on Friday and Saturday, 4 and 5
November, and later on Friday, the 11th. 66/

The visits coincided with the decision branch-points in the Program )
development, for they oecurred in sequence with significant new inputs of
information and discussions, and in each case resulted in an important
decision or public announcement. ;

TOP SECRET - Sensitive .
99 aes rr a
