es

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

concocted behind their backs. Consequently, many of the
actions which we are pressing on the South Vietnamese are
flagging because of this uncertainty...

"Both Ambassador Lodge and General Westmoreland, at
the Honolulu Conference expressed the opinion that the situa-
tion in South Vietnam would 'jog along’ at the current stale-
mated pace unless some dramatic ‘victory’ could be introduced
to put new steel and confidence into the Vietnamese Jeader-
ship. General Westmoreland defined ‘victory’ as a determina-
tion to take some new vigorous military commitment, such as
air strikes against Viet Cong installations in the Laos corri-
dor. Ambassador Lodge defined ‘victory’ as a willingness to
make punitive airy strikes against North Vietnam. The signifi-
cant fact about both...suggestions was that they looked toward
some American decision to undertake a commitment which the
Vietnamese would interpret as a willingness to raise the
military ante and eschew negotiations begun from a position
of weakness.

"While it is almost impossible to establish measurements
of Vietnamese morale, we are able to say that there is not
at the current moment a single galvanized national purpose,
expressed in the goverrment leadership and energizing all
elements of the country with a simple sense of confidence." 80/

The selective Westmoreland plan offered hope and was sufficiently
general to avoid specific opposition. The conference agreed that Saigon
should complete the plan and work urgently on its implementation.

Several. more minor decisions were made on unilateral matters.
'Czar' powers for information were put in the hands of Zorthian. It was
agreed that the DCM should be strengthened with a “truly executive man,"
and there was to be a clearing-of-decks on the military side in Saigon
through reductions in social activities and cut-downs in dependents.
None of these measures was expected to affect the dubious prognosis for
the next 3-6 months. The best that could be hoped for was a slight gain
by the end of the year.

There was serious discussion of military plans and intelligence
estimates regarding wider actions outside South Vietnam. Subjects included.
the conduct of military operations in Iaos, a major build-up of forces,
and planning of possible air strikes against North Vietnam. The conclu-
sion reached was that the somewhat less pessimistic estimate of the pres-
ent situation afforded the opportunity to further refine these plans.

The conference concluded that the crucial actions for the immedi-
ate future were (1) to prosecute an urgent information effort in the United
States toward dispelling the basic doubts of the value of Southeast Asia
which were besetting key members of Congress and the public in the budding
"creat debate," and (2) to start diplomatic efforts with the Thais, Aus-
tralians, New Zealanders, Philippines, and the French on matters within

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
