Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Chief be upgraded...that Province Chiefs have operational control (as
a mininum) of all military and paramilitary forces assigned to operate
exclusively in their sector." 8/ The Study Group recognized that

“the power structure being what it is in the GVN, major progress toward
this goal will not be short range or spectacular." But, they urged,
the U.S. should begin to push forward on it.

_ MACV had nonconcurred in this recommendation. General Westmoreland,
in a memorandum to Lodge on September 7, 1966, had said that he did not
agree with the idea, and that, if carried out, "the Corps span of control
would be too large for effective direction." The suggestion, he added,
was "illogical," 9/

This was still. the position of MACV when Komer arrived, In his
attempts to find a workable civilian-military chain of command, he
received two suggestions on the difficult question of the role of the
Division advisory teams, The first, and more routine, was to continue
the existing MACV system -- in which, no matter how good or bad the
GVN chain of command may be, the U.S. simply duplicates it on the advisory
side. This would mean thet all American civilians and military at the
Provinee level would come under the Division-Corps chain of command.

The MACV staff assumed that this would happen.

John Paul Vann and a few colleagues had a different suggestion.
Vann maintained that the evidence suggested that when the Americans
made their desires known clearly to the Vietnamese, without the vague-
ness and contradictoriness which so often characterized them, then the
Vietnamese usually would follow suit after a suitable period of time,
Thus, said Vann, if the Americans remove the Division advisory team
from the U.S. chain of command, except for tactical matters and logistical
support, the GVN may follow, and reduce the power of their politically
potent Divisions.

The thesis Vann was putting forward -- that the GVN would follow
a strong U.S. example -- was untested and hotly disputed. Secondly,
there was the matter of MACV's stand against downgrading the role of
the ARVN Divisions. Few people observing the discussions thought that
the Vann suggestion had a chance of success.

But Komer, persuaded by the argument, did overrule many of his
staff and make the recommendation to Westmoreland. ‘Westmoreland approved
it, and in dune, 1967, the new chains of command were announced to the
U.S. Mission. After years of arguing, during all of which the trend
had been towards stronger ARVN Divisions, the U.S. had suddenly reversed
course on its own, without waiting for the Vietnamese to act. The change
was so complete that it even extended to that last (and, to career
officers, most important) question: who writes the efficiency report,
Under the new MACV guidance, the Senior Province Advisor would be rated

133 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
