Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in February 1968 an analysis of 1967 pacification-R/D results as
revealed in the HiS was published by OSD Systems Analysis.

Hamlet Evaluation System (HES) reports for CY 1967
indicate that pacification progressed slowly during the
first half of 1967, and lost ground in the second half.
Most (60%) of the 1967 gain results from accounting type
changes to the HES system, not from pacification progress;
hamlet additions and deletions, and revised population
estimates accounted for half of the January-June increase
and all of the June-December increase. In the area that
really counts--VC-D-E hamlets rising to A-B-C ratings--we
actually suffered a net loss of 10,100 people between June
and December 1967. The enemy's offensive eppears to have .
killed the revolutionary development program, as currently
conceived. Recent reports state that to a large extent,
the VC now control the country-side. 191/

Written in the pessimistic atmosphere of the 1968 post-Tet period this
view may over~emphasize negative factors. Ambassador Komer wrote a
stinging dissent that appeared in the next monthly issue of the Systems
Analysis Southeast Asia Analysis Report. 192/ Statistical analysis
aside, pacification clearly failed to make the significant strides

that the President had hoped for in 1967. It certainly did not initiate
any Revolutionary Development likely to transform the qualify of life
for the Vietnamese farmer or to alter fundamentally the course of the
war.

Concurrently with attempts to improve information on the security
programs, MACV exhibited increased interest in 1967 in improving RVNAT
effectiveness. Early in the year it was decided to undertake an extensive,
unit-by-unit effectiveness evaluation. Units judged to be superfluous or
consistently below standard were to be cut off from U.S. support. 193/
Decisions on support withdrawal were to be made semi-annually as new
evaluations were received. MACV explained to CINCPAC that the review
would include:

---all VNAF, VNN, VNMC, ARVN tactical and logistical
units, and RF/PF units in the current projected FY 68 force
structure. The methodology for the evaluation includes:
identification of the credibility and feasibility of current
plans of RVNAF officials to guarantee increased effectiveness;
study of unit performance trends during the past six months;
determination of availability of necessary plans to train
personnel in the required skills; and evaluation of the degree
of command interest at all levels for improvement of the
ineffective or non-productive units. Considering these
factors, units are categorized as improvement probable,
doubtful, or unlikely. For those units categorized as

103 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
