Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

10

waters, or engage in any hostile act. Yet, while she was 2S niles from
the coast of North Vietnam, on a course away from the coast, Maddow
was attacked by three North Vietnamese torpedo boats. At least three
torpedoes were directed by the boats at the Maddow. as well as
machinegun fire. The I/addow avoided all torpedoes and, together
with aircraft arriving on the scene from the U.S.S. Ticonderoga, re-
pelled the attack and sank or damaged the attacking craft.

The attack on Aaddow took place in daylight. North Vietnamese
reports of their plans had previously been obtained from an intelli-
gence source. The attacking craft were clearly seen by 2/uddow per-
sonnel and were photographed. The launching of the torpedoes by
these PT boats was also observed as were the torpedo wakes eens
near dfaddoz. Machinegun fire from the attackers was also observed
and, indeed, one bullet was recovered—it is in owr possession and I
have it here this morning if you wish to inspect it. oreo ||:

This was an unprovoked attack on a ship of the United States on
the high seas, Nevertheless, no reprisal by the United States was
undertaken, The Maddox, fortunately, had avoided significant dam-
age itself, and inflicted damage on the attackers. Since no rational
motive for the attack was apparent, we believed it possible that it had
resulted from a miscalculation or an impulsive act of a local com-
mander. After the second attack, the chairman commented in Sen-
ate debate that I had stated, after the first attack on the Maddox,
that I did not expect it to be repeated. He also noted that this showed
how wrong I was. ’

On August 3, the day following, a note of protest was dispatched

- to the North Vietnam regime at the direction of the President. It

concluded with the words: “The U.S. Government expects that the
authorities of the regime in North Vietnam will be under no mis-
apprehension as to the grave consequences which would inevitably
result from any further unprovoked offensive military action against
US. forces.” At the same time, the President made public his instrue-
tions to the Navy to continue and to add another destroyer to its
patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin.

It was within this context that we received, at about 9:20 Wash-
ington time on the morning of August 4, information from an intel-
ligence source that North Vietnamese naval forces had been ordered
toattack the patrol.

Soon thereafter reports from the Maddow were received that the
patrol was being approached by high speed surface radar contacts
and that an attack appeared imminent. Other amplifying messages
quickly followed and by about 11 a.m., we received a flash report that
our destroyers, then located some 60 to 65 miles from the coast of North
Vietnam, were actually under attack. During this same time. intelli-
Sence sources reported that North Vietnamese vessels stated they had
our sate under attack. Throughout the remainder of the morning
and carly afternoon, flash message reports of the engagement, some
ambiguous and some conflicting, continuel to pour in. Frequent
telephone contact was maintained with the commander in chief of
the Pacific Fleet, Hawaii. The President was kept informed of these
developments.

a ee ee ee ee ees
