Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2, Vance-CIA on the: ability of NVN to meet force
increases in the South.

3. Wheeler-Vance on the military effectiveness of
cutting back bombing to below the 20th Parallel, and on
whether it would save US casualties.

h, CIA believes that the Chinese might not intervene
if an invasion of NVN did not seem to threaten the Hanoi
regime. Vance states an invasion would cause Chinese inter-
vention. Vance believes that the Chinese could decide to
intervene if the ports were mined; CIA does not mention
this possibility.

5. CIA and the Mission disagree with Vance on whether
we have achieved the cross-over point and, more broadly,
on how well the “big war" is going. One CIA analysis, contra-
dicted in a latter [sic/ CIA statement, expresses the view that
the enemy's strategic position has improved over the past year.

6. CIA-INR on whether Hanoi seeks to wear us down (CIA)
or seeks more positive victories in the South (INR).

7. INR believes that the bombing has had a greater
effect than does CIA.

8. Vance and CIA say we have struck all worthwhile
targets in NVN except the ports. Wheeler disagrees.

9. CIA cites inflationary pressures and the further
pressure that would be caused by Course A. Vance says that
these pressures are under control and could be handled if
Course A were adopted.

10, Rostow believes that a call-up of reserves would
show Hanoi that we mean business and have more troops coming--
Vance believes that a reserve call-up would lead to divisive
debate which would encourage Hanoi. Would not the call-up
indicate that we had manpower problems?

11. Bundy-Vance disagreements on the degree to which
we have contained China,- whether our comaitment ends if the
SVNamese don't help themselves, the NLF role in political
life, regroupees, and our and Hanoi's rights to lend sup-
port to friendly forces in SVN after a settlement. 156

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
