Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Khanh emphasized figures were planning
figures only and designed give idea of number of
military and civilians required and indicate
financial implications of plan...

McNamara stated that U.S....would wish to
study strength figures carefully; however, ‘
his first impression was that figure of
422,874 SDC and Hamlet Militia appeared unduly
large and would be difficult to support. Khanh
responded that in actual practice total numbers
may not reach this level. In fact, number may
not exceed 300,000 SDC and Hamlet Militia
actually deployed against VC...

Thieu stated that all men a age 18
through 40 would be required to participate in
national pacification effort. Most of them...
would serve in same positions they now occupy.
Others, such as National Youth Group up to age
40, would be required serve in city and country-
side and would be organized into small groups
to assist ARVN and Civil Guard. Category of
Political-Administration Corps would consist
of cadres planned for assignment to villages
and hamlets. General Thieu estimated that
125,000 such cadre would be required...McNamara
stated that general approach appeared excellent
but he questioned whether GVN would need 125,000
cadre...This number added to total figures for
Civil Guard, SDC and Hamlet Militia, constituted
‘an extremely large figure...population appeared
disproportionate..desirable to look most closely
at planning figures.

Khanh replied that he intended make maximum
effort in first instance in 8 critical provinces
surrounding Saigon...However, a National Service
Act would have a very good effect in Saigon and
the other urban areas.

McNamara inquired whether upon his return
to Washington he could tell President Johnson
that General Khanh's government was prepared
embark on a program of national mobilization of
human and material resources and whether Presi-
dent Johnson in turn could inform the American
people...Khanh replied in the affirmative...

- McNamara indicated that he viewed concept

favorably and ...Ambassador stated that he

Ie
