Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Economic implications - Treasury
Congressional implications - Defense

Implications for public opinion - domestic and
international - State.

h, Negotiation Alternatives
Assignment - State 18/

In addition, Secretary Clifford indicated that certain military options
were to be examined in this review. These options were:

Option I: Add approximately 196,000 troops to the present
total authorized force level, i.e. Program 5
(525,000) plus the six additional battalions
already deployed (10,500). Restrictions cur-
rently imposed on air and ground operations in
Cambodia, Laos, and North Vietnam are relaxed
to permit destruction of the ports, mining of
the waterways, attack of complete target systems
in NVN and offensive operations against vc/NVA
Army forces in Laos and Cambodia.

Option IA: No change from Option I except that current
restrictions on ground and air operations in
Cambodia, Laos, and NVN are maintained.

Option II: No change to total authorized force level
(525,000 plus 10,500 augnentation) except to
deploy 3 fighter squadrons authorized within
the ceiling but not deployed.

Option III: Add 50,000 troops above those currently authorized.
Option IV: Add 100,000 troops above those currently authorized. 19/

The main work in preparing a paper for Secretary Clifford to present
to the President was to be done in the Defense Department by a group of
staff action officers working intensively under the direction of Mr. Leslie
Gelb. These staff officers worked as a drafting committee while a group
consisting of Mr. Warnke, Mr. Enthoven, Mr. Halperin and Mr. Steadman
acted as a policy review board. Of the work done outside the Pentagon,
only the papers on negotiations and SVN domestic policies prepared by
Mr. Bundy and Mr. Habib at State and General Taylor's paper on alternative
strategies went to the White House. The other materials contributed by
CIA,. State, Treasury, and the Joint Staff were fed into the deliberative
process at the Pentagon but were not included as such in the final product.
Thus, the dominant voice jn the consideration of alternatives as the reassess~
ment progressed was that of the OSD.

If TOP SECRET - Sensitive
