Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

elena TP Ar Ae

Re a ele
Buy! Uae hye

Tonkin in the course of the next month. He came to Hanoi on August 7,
1947. The Ramadier Government, at that time, faced the difficult ques-
tions of the Statute of Algeria and the Municipal Election law and was
under attack from within its own party. Bollaert, instead of delivering
his speech, when the government.....No less than four "conseils restrients
des Ministres" and one full "Conseil", plus a series of private interviews
between Bollaert, the Generals de Pellet and Valluy, and Ramadier were
needed to settle the final form of the speech, which I am informed, was
much changed from the original version.

The speech, then, was word by word and sentence by sentence labori-
ously assembled by the Ramadier Government, and is the logical conclusion
of France policy as pursued in Northern Indo China for the past two years,
For as the French military position in Tonkin has improved militarily, so
in almost exact ratio hes declined their willingness to make concessions.
M. Bollaert's speech represents a definite retreat from the French
position taken in the March 6, 1946, Accords, and indeed its terms on
their face are no more liberal than the 1884 Treaty of the Protectorate.

Stripped of its verbiage, the speech constituted an oblique offer to
the Vietnamese people to bring forth a "representative government" which
would accept the terms offered by M.-Bollaert on which there was to be no
"bargaining" as this "would be in truth unworthy of such a noble cause."
This seems to be designed as an escape clause for the French government
and is directed against Ho Chi Minh with whom the French apparently will
deal only in a last extremity. At thepresent time, the French have no
intention of dealing with Ho and should he accept the terms as offered,
the French would unquestionably demand the immediate surrender of his
arms and armies for “the weapons must grow silent."

Bollaert first defined the goal toward which "the Vietnamese people
aspire freedom within the French Union and unity of the three Kys". He
said this freedom is in no way restricted other than "by the limits forced
on it by the fact that these territories belong to the French Union".

But France, he maintained "does not take any position with regard to the
problem" of unity of the Kys save that "she requires that the Union should
not be made under pressure and according to totalitarian formulas univer-
sally condemned". ‘Then should the Union be derived from the popular wish
duly expressed, local particularisns shovld be preserved, and the cohesion
of the Annamite countries should "be founded not on the interest of only
one but on the confidence and friendship of all", he stated.

As for the states, separated or unified as they wish, M. Bollsaert said
"we are ready to hand over to the fully quelified governments the manage-
ments of public affairs" which means the organization without French
interference of "its representative institutions, judicial proceedings, its
own finance, education, social legislation, and hospitals”.

The states of the peninsula, M. Bollaert then foresaw by the facts of
geography have certain common interests which will require common policies.
He pointed out thet "ell right minded people” will concede that among other

. Poe Sh ttad Seek is wea |

ee Sth f Fe ae |
rw Usigini Siwios au Bs ode
—/
