Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

10,500 to Vietnam immediately to reconstitute COMUSMACV's strategic
reserve and put out the fire. 16/

With the decision to dispatch, among others, the remainder
of the 82d Airborne Division as emergency augmentation and its public
announcement, the policy process slowed down appreciably for the fol-
lowing ten days. The troops were loaded aboard the aircraft for the
flight to Vietnam on February 14 and the President flew to Ft. Bragg to
personally say farewell to them. The experience proved for him to be
one of the most profoundly moving and troubling of the entire Vietnam
war. The men, many of whom had only recently returned from Vietnam, were
grim. They were not young men going off to adventure but seasoned veterans
returning to an ugly conflict from which they knew some would not return.
The film clips of the President shaking hands with the solemn but deter-
mined paratroopers on the ramps of their aircraft revealed a deeply
troubled leader. He was confronting the men he was asking to make the
sacrifice and they displayed no enthusiasm. It may well be that the
dramatic decisions of the succeeding month and a half that reversed the
direction of American policy in the war had their genesis in those troubled
handshakes.

B. The "A to Z" Review
1. The Reassessment Begins

For roughly ten days, things were guiet in Washington. In
Vietnam, the battle for the recapture of the Citadel in Hue raged on until
the 24th of February before the last North Vietnamese defenders were over-
run. As conditions in South Vietnam sorted themselves out and some semblance
of normality returned to the command organizations, MACV began a compre-
hensive reassessment of his requirements. Aware that this review was going
on and that it would result in requests for further troop augmentation,
the President sent General Wheeler, the Chairman of the JCS to Saigon on
February 23 to consult with General Westmoreland and report back on the
new situation and its implication for further forces. Wheeler returned
from Vietnam on the 25th and filed his report on the 27th. The substance
of his and General Westmoreland's recommendations had preceded him to
Washington, however, and greatly troubled the President. The military
were requesting a major reinforcement of more than 3 divisions and sup-
porting forces totalling in excess of 200,000 men, and were asking for
a callup of some 280,000 reservists to fill these requirements and flesh
out the strategic reserve and training base at home. 17/ _ The issue was
thus squarely joined. To accept the military recommendations would entail
not only a full-scale callup of reserves, but also putting the country
economically on @ semi-war footing, all at a time of great domestic dissent,
dissatisfaction, and disillusionment about both the purposes and the conduct
of the war. The President was understandably reluctant to take such action,
the more so in an election year.

.

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
