Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

half 1966, the figures for last five months of year are

not complete. Also, data after September 1966 repre-

sents only partial returns subject to considerable upward
revision. Recent intensive community-wide review of the
foregoing at CINCPAC resulted in an agreed data base with
Oct 65 through Dec 66 time frame. (Oct 65 selected as
historical start point attributable to initiation intensive
NVA build-up). The mean monthly infiltration during this
time frame has been about 6-7,000.

"An example of late data recently incorporated in
infiltration statistics follows: The 165 NVA regiment
began infiltrating into SVN in March 1966 but did not
complete infiltration until about July 66. Sufficient
information became available in January 1967 to permit
the acceptance of the 165 NVA regiment in the order of
battle. It had been unidentified and unknown earlier.

As the result, confirmed infiltration figures for July
1966 were revised upward in January 1967 by 1,950 to
reflect the 165th regiment's strength upon reorganization
in SVN. Review of statistical infiltration data also
shows that figures require 90 to 180 dey time frame to

be developed. Concur, that the NVA may be approaching
their current planned force structure in SVN. In the
future, it will probably be even more difficult to gener-
ate short-term infiltration data. Infiltrators may enter
SVN more often in groups vice large units. Groups may
break up shortly after infiltration as replacements
compounding the problem for our intelligence gathering
agencies, and further complicating the statistical prob-
len.

"This is an estimate and we feel more time is
required to gain substantiating information.

"We take particular exception with statement in the
reference that Hanoi may be willing to enter into negoti-
ations to get bombing stopped.

"CINCPAC position is there are no repeat no-indications
that indicate NVN has changed previously stated terms for

negotiation which is basis for USG resumption of bombing just
ordered. Negotiations embodying NVN terms would, in effect,

require the surrender of our stated objectives in SVN.
"In addition, there are no repeat no indications

available here that NVN has changed original intent to

vigorously prosecute the war notwithstanding allied bombing
53)

which has caused NVN severe difficulty."

hs TOP SECRET - Sensitive
