Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But Washington hed just finished cramming an unpleasant action down the
Mission's throat, and it was felt that there were limits to how much
the Mission should be asked to take, especially since Lodge and Porter
were so adamant on the subject. 1/ Also, no one could foresee how
diverting other matters would become to Porte, or how much he would
delegate to Lathram,

_ Whe second major decision for OCO was the selection of the Regional
Directors =-- men who would be given full control over all American
civiliens in their respective regions. Here Porter presented Lathram
with three nominees (II Corps was left unfilled until a few weeks later)
and the choices appeared to be quite good ones: in I Corps, Porter's former
Assistant Deputy Ambassador, Henry Koren; in III Corps, the former MACV
Division Senior Advisor, then with ATD, John Paul Vann; and in the Delta,
the CIA's former support chief, Vince Heymann. These were three respected
men, and they came from three different agencies, which emphasized the
interagency nature of OCO, In picking Vann, Porter had made a major
decision which involved possibly antagonizing both the CIA and MACV, for
Vann was without question one of the most controversial Americans in
Vietnam, He stood for impatience with the American Mission, deep and
often publicly-voiced disgust with the course of the past five years,
strong convictions on what needed to be done, driving energy and an
encyclopedic knowledge of recent events in Vietnam -- and was a burr in
the side of the CIA, with which he had frequently tangled, particularly
over the cadre program, and MACV, with which he had fought ever since
disagreeing publicly with General Harkins in 1963 (ea fight which led to
his resignation from the Army and was extensively discussed in David

Halberstam's book, The Making of a Quagmire.)

The importance of the appointments was not lost on the Mission or
the press. While Lathram's appointment had stirred the bureaucracy but
not the press, the regional directors came as a surprise and a major
story. In a front-page story in The Washington Post, Ward Just described
Vann as "one of the legendary Americans in Vietnam,” and said that Koren's
appointment indicated the great importance the Mission attached to the
jobs. Just added that “there were indications that, if OCO did not
succeed, the militery command would take charge of pacification, or
"Revolutionary Development!" 2/

Next came the selection of OCO Province Representatives, to be chosen
out of the available talent in each provinee, Here“the slowness of the
civilians began to tell, and it was not until January that the appoint-
ments could be made for every province. Trying to pick men on the basis
of their knowlege and ebility takes time and requires trips to each
province, consultations with other Mission Council members, etc., and
the civilians set out to do all this.

Meanwhile, a huge job which no one in Washington could fully appreciate
was underway -- the physical relocation of offices that Lodge had

123 -
TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive
