Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- The civilians in the provinces spoke with a single voice for the
first time. The province chiefs welcomed the change for this reason,
according to most observers. Within the American team in each province,
there was now a built-in obligation to consult with each other, instead
of the previous situation in which more and mcre agencies were sending
Gown to the provinces their own men who worked alone on their own projects.

-- The very act of physical relocation of the five major branches ~
of OCO into a single building changed attitudes and behavior patterns in
the civilian mission. Public Safety and the Special Branch advisors,
for exawple, now were co-located, and began working together closely.
Previously, they had both advised the same people through completely
separate channels which met only at the top; i.e., when the chief of the
Public Safety branch and the deputy CIA station chief had something
specific and urgent they had to resolve. On the day-to-day matters,
there had actually been a deliberate compartmentalization before OCO was
formed.

These examples of gains could be repeated across a broad front,
They were first steps in a direction which might ultimately have created
a strong civilian mission, given time, better leaders, and more support
frou Washington. But even without these things, OCO was a definite plus.

The period between December and April was a period in which every-
one paid lip service to the idea of supporting OCO, but in reality it
was sniped at and attacked almost from the outset by the bureaucracies.
In Saigon, Zorthien, and Hart, Directors of JUSPAO and CIA, respectively,
wade it clear that they wanted to remain very much involved in any decision
affecting their respective fields of endeavor. While this was a reasonable
point of view, it meant that CIA and even USLA officers in the field often
refused to accept any guidance from the OCO representative, and cases
began to come to light in which major actions were being initiated by the
CIA without any consultation with OCO. (The CIA reasoning and defense
rested on the fact that one of Hart's deputies was ostensibly an assistant
director of OCO.)

In Washington, there was open skepticism to OCO from almost all
quarters, particularly AID, which found itself footing most of the bill.
USIA and CIA both indicated that they would continue to deal directly
with their field personnel. In theory, everyone in Washington was to
participate in the backstopping of the interagency OCO, but in practice,
without a single voice in charge, this meant that no one was helping
QCO, no one was trying to sell them as a going concern in Washington,
Komer's role here was ambiguous; he supported OCO as long as it was in
operation, end probably contributed more to its achievements than any-
one else in Washington, but at the same time he was already on the
record as favoring a military takeover, which was the very thing OCO
sought to avoid,

12) ,

*

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
