Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and loss of civilian confidence. Early commitment of addi-
tional US/third-country forces in sufficient quantity, in
general reserve and offensive roles, should stave off GVN
defeat. :

The success of the program from the military point of
view turns on whether the Vietnamese hold their own in terms
of numbers and fighting spirit, and on whether the US forces
can be effective in a quick-reaction reserve role, a role in
which they are only now being tested. The number of US troops
is too small to make a significant difference in the tradi-
tional 10-1 government-guerrilla formula, but it is not too
small to make a significant difference in the kind of war
which seems to be evolving in Vietnam -- a "Third Stage" or
conventional war in which it is easier to identify, locate
and attack the enemy.

The plan is such that the risk of escalation into war with
China or the Soviet Union can be kept small. US and South
Vietnamese casualties will increase -- just how much cannot
be predicted with confidence, but the US killed-in-action
might be in the vicinity of 500 a month by the end of the
year. The South Vietnamese under one government or another
will probably see the thing through and the United States public
will support the course of action because it is a sensible and
courageous military-political program designed and likely to
bring about a success in Vietnam.

It should be recognized, however, that success against
the larger, more conventional, vC/PAVN forces could merely
drive the VC back into the trees and back to their 1960-64
pattern -- a pattern against which US troops and aircraft
would be of limited value but with which the GVN, with our
help, could cope. The questions here would be whether the VC
could maintain morale after such a set-back, and whether the
south Vietnamese would have the will to hang on through another
cycle. 17/

3- The President's Decision

The President accepted the recommendation of building up to

175,000, but disapproved the call up of reserves, and made no decision
(since none was really necessary at the time) on the full Phase IZ
strength. In a backgrounder, following his announcement of the troop
increase on 28 July 1965, the President explasned that the reserves, if
called, would have taken several months before they were equipped to be
éffective in Vietnam, so he decided to use the Airmobile Division and
Battalions on Okinawa which were ready to go. 18/ The disapproval of
the reserve call up appears to have been the President's decision and

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
