Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that they quarreled publicly emong themselves and overlooked their
common interests. At other times, people who diségreed strongly on
major issues found themselves temporary allies with a common objective.

Moreover, there is the curious problem of the distance between
rhetoric and reality. Even during the dark days of 1964-1965, most
Americans paid lip service, particularly in official, on the record
statements, to the ultimate importance of pacification. But their
public affirmation of the cliches about "winning the hearts and minds
of the people” were not related to any programs or priorities then in
existence in Vietnam, and they can mislead the casual observer.

The resurgence of pacification was dramatically punctuated by
three Presidential conferences on Pacific islands with the leaders of
the GVN -- Honolulu in Februery, 1966, Manila in October, 1966 (with
five other Chiefs of State also present), and Guem in March, 1967.
After each conference the relative importance of pacification took
another leap upward within the U.S. Government -- reflecting a success-
ful effort within the U.S. Government by its American proponents -- and
the U.S. tied the GVN onto Declarations and Communiques which committed
them to greeter effort.

In addition, each conference was followed by 2 major re-organiza-
tion within the U.S. Mission, designed primarily to improve our manage-
ment of the pacification effort. After Honolulu, Deputy Ambassador
Porter was given broad new authority to run the civilian agencies.

After Manila, Porter was directed to re-organize the components of USIA,
CIA, and AID internally to create a single Office of Civil Operations
(0CO). And after Guam, OCO -- redesignated as CORDS -- was put under

the control of General Westmoreland, who was given a civilian deputy with
the personal rank of Ambassador to assist him.

, The low priority of pacification in 1965 was the understandable

result of a situation in which battles of unprecedented size were tak-
ing place in the highlands and along the coast, the air war was moving
slowly north towards Hanoi, and the GVN was in a continual state of
disarray.

But a series of events and distinct themes were at work which would

converge to give pacification a higher priority. They were to meet at
the Honolulu conference in February, 1966.

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
