Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

have viewed it as evidence that United Stetes policy in Southeast Asia
was fraught with real contradictions.) For exemple, the one feature
that gave Option "C" its most distinctive character -- early willingness
to negotiate without the concurrent effects of continually mounting
military pressures ~~ was its most wmcertein aspect. This particular
part of the analysis wes revised twice between the final drafting of
the group's findings and their consideration by the Principals. More-
over, the Working Group had received at least one informed judgment

to the effect that, given Henoi's high stakes in South Vietnam and its
perceived opportunity to deel the United States a major blow, the DRV
would not be likely to negotiate in response to any of the options. 9t/
On the eve of the initial meeting with the Principals, Chairman Bundy
called early negotiations "the least satisfactory part of the present
script." In particular it was recognized as difficult to "keep up our
show of determination and at the seme time listen for nibbles." 98/

In many respects Option C seems to have been favored primarily
for what it incorporated ~~ for the means it employed -- rather than
for what it might achieve. It certainly wes not presented as an opti-
mistic alternetive. Under "¢,." the group perceived that "at best...
the DRV might fein compliance and settle for an opportunity to subvert
the South another day.” This stood in marked contrast to whet it per-=
ceived as the "at best" outcome of "BR," namely that Hanoi "might be
ready to sit down and work out a settlement in some form that would give
a restoration of the 1954 agreements," hopefully with firmer guarantees.
Moreover, with "C," the group believed that in between the best and
worst outcomes, the United States "night be faced with no improvement
in the internal South Vietnem situation and with the difficult decision
whether to escalate on up to major conflict with China." 99/ This kind
of outcome promised little more than the group perceived as available
through "A" -- and without the additional commitment of national pres-
tige and military force. But it was an outcome readily perceivable
from a policy that clung tenaciously to rather major objectives but was
reticent to accept major risks.

2+ Views From Outside the NSC Working Grows
aS £rom Outside the NSC Working Group

While the NSC Working Group was preparing its findings for sub-
mission to the Principals, other sources of influential opinion were
comamicating their views to these individuals. In addition, it is im-
portant to consider that members of the Working Group were most likely
comiunicating their respective impressions of group progress to the
principal official in the agencies they represented. Thus, William
Bundy no doubt shared ideas with Secretary Rusk; John McNaughton with
Secretary McNamara; Harold Ford with CIA Director MeCone; and Admiral’
Mustin with General Wheeler. Some of these Principals no doubt had
injected particular ideas into the group's deliberations. Whatever the
source, these high officials were exposed to @ variety of suggestions and
viewpoints before reacting directly to the Working Group's submissions.

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
