Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

items, from other sources, which might have lent some credence to the
Khanh allegations (although in the course of time Khanh's allegations
were discounted almost entirely). These were (1) Tran Van Ly gained
impression in conversation with Xuan that Xuan favored a coup, (2)

Lt, Col. Tran Dinh Lam, recently brought back from Paris at the

request of Generals Tran Van Don and Le Van Kim, was reported to have
French authorization to spend 2 billion piastres to achieve a neutrali-
zation of South Vietnam. (3) An American had observed several military
trucks bringing weapons and ammunition to Xuan's police headquarters

at Camp DuMare, (4) GeneralsKim, Don, Nguyen Van Vy, and Duong Van

Duc had been identified by Major General Le Van Nghiem as pro-French
and privately in favor of neutralization. Nevertheless, Khanh's charges .
along with other reports were described by CAS as difficult to evaluate;
and it was speculated that he and others making similar charges might
be motivated by disgruntlement over failure to obtain better positions
for themselves within the MRC.

The next move in this sequence of events was when General Khanh
talked to Ambassador Lodge in Saigon on the afternoon of 29 January.
The striking thing is that although Khanh evidently made his intentions
clear, the Ambassador's first thought was to protest to DeGaulle rather
than to warn the GVN. That evening at 8:00 p.m., Ambassador Lodge
filed a NODIS (Hmbtel 1431) suggesting that representations should be
made to DeGaulle against French clandestine plotting to upset the GVN
and set it thereby upon a neutralist course. 39/ General Khanh had
apparently made an impression on the Ambassador with his allegations
of French machinations, asking for assurance that the U.S. opposed neu-
tralizetion and if necessary would help him, Khanh, get his family, then
in Da Nang, out of the country. He claimed that he had the support of
General Khiem of ITI Corps and General Tri of II Corps as well as 90
percent of the army and 70 percent of the existing government. Lodge
further reported that Khanh made a special point of wanting to continue
to use Colonel Jasper Wilson as his exclusive contact with the U.S.
Khanh refused absolutely to deal with any other than Wilson because he
had had "an unfortunate experience with a CIA representative named Spera,
before the 31 October coup." Lodge went on to say that although he had
no great faith in Xuan, he believed that Don and Kim were patriotic
Vietnamese and "therefore, what General Khanh says about them goes
against my deepest instincts." Lodge sensed the intent of a coup, but
evidently did not appreciate its imminence; for although he said he ex-
pected that there would be more to report later, he decided not to
alter the government of Vietnam and had confided the news from Wilson
only to Harkins and DeSilva.

However, it was a matter of only about seven hours after reporting
this first Khanh feeler that Lodge at 3:15 a.m. of 30 January (Saigon
tithe) advised Secretaries Rusk and McNamara that:

General Khanh has informed us through his contact,
Colonel Jasper Wilson, MAAG advisor I Corps, that he
“together with General Phat and Khiem intend to move at
0400 this morning to secure changes in the composition

28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
