=a

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

important in U.S. thinking in 1964 and early 1965, subsided accordingly.
The uneasy agreement between Thieu and Ky to run on the same ticket,
resulting partly from U.S, pressure for military unity, and the subsequent
transition to legitimacy, gave the U.S. a sense of relief and satisfaction,
although no one suggested that GVN had yet built a broad political base

or had solved its effectiveness problems. This GVN stability made possible
the increased attention to pacification and nation-building.

The pacification parameter had changed as well. From 1961 to June of
1965, the U.S. flooded SVN with the advisory resources of men and money
to keep the GVN afloat and RVNAF fighting. This input lacked a clear plan.
After June 1965, we made a concerted effort to organize pacification.
We exacted an agreement from the GVN in the fall of 1966 to shift half of
its ground forces into pacification--although U.S. forces carried a share
of this burden and attempted to show RVNAF how to do it. We tried to
centralize pacification programs by creating a new GVN structure to control -
and allocate resources. This was made manifest by the establishment of a
separate Ministry for Revolutionary Development. U.S, moves by stages to
the unified civil-military CORDS organization in Vietnam paralleled this
super-ministry for pacification. And, pacification statistics showed steady
increase of GVN control in the countryside, reversing the downward trend
of previous years--but, U.S. dissatisfaction with GVN performance also
increased nonetheless.

Beyond and more important than all this were the U.S. efforts them-
selves. By the close of 1965, 170,000 U.S. combat forces were in SVN. By
the end of 1967, this figure was almost half a million. By mid-1965, U.S.
air strikes against, North Vietnam had extended in geographic coverage up
to 20930', and approved targets had widened beyond LOC's. Total sorties
rose to about 900 per week. By 1968, we were bombing throughout the North,
with very few though important targets still being prohibited. Total sorties
per week reached about 4,000.

It was in this context that U.S.-GVN relations took shape.

Leverage

Having suffered several backfires in the attempts to require or encourage
GVN effectiveness in 1964, the Embassy and Washington generally preferred to
let well enough alone in 1965 through 1967. ‘The U.S, limited itself to only
a few demands, and usually avoided direct confrontations at the top levels
of government-to-government contact.

The U.S. had one repetition of its old backfire problem following the
Honolulu Conference of February 1966. President Johnson embraced Ky pub-
jlicly and endorsed his government; Ky then felt strong enough to move against
General Thi, who had been making trouble generally and was almost openly
weiting for his chance to take over the GVN. Ky eventuelly succeeded in
removing Thi and getting him out of the country, but at the cost of returning

*

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
