Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

And in these times as in times before, it is true that
a house divided against itself by the spirit of faction, of
party, of region, of religion, of race, is a house that can-
not stand.

There is division in the American house now. There
is devisiveness among us all tonight. And holding the trust
that is mine, as President of all the people, I cannot dis-
regard the peril to the progress of the American people and
the hope and the prospect of peace for all peoples.

So, I would ask all Americans, whatever their personal
interests or concern, to guard against devisiveness and all
its ugly consequences.

Fifty-two months and ten days ago, in a moment of tragedy
and trauma, the duties of this office fell uwpon me. I asked
then for your help and God's, that we might continue America
on its course, binding up our wounds, healing our history,
moving forward in new unity, to clear the American agenda and
to keep the American commitment for all of our people.

United we have kept that commitment. United we have
enlarged that commitment.

Through all time to come, I think America will be a
stronger nation, a more just society, and a land of greater
opportunity and fulfillment because of what we have all done
together in these years of unparalleled achievement.

Our reward will come in the life of freedom, peace, and
hope that our children will enjoy through ages ahead.

What we won when all of our people united just must not
now be lost in suspicion, distrust, selfishness, and politics
among any of our people.

Having eloquently stated the need for unity in a nation divided, the
President then made the dramatic announcement which shocked and electrified
the nation and the world, an announcement intended to restore unity to the

divided nation:

Believing this as I do, I have eoncluited that I should not
permit the Presidency to become inyolved in the partisan
divisions that are developing in this political year.

With America's sons in the fields far away, with America's
future under challenge right here at home, with our hopes

*

8&9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
