Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Striking Turnabout

The morning of March 19, the advisory group assembled in
the White House to discuss what they had heard the previous
evening and arrived at their verdict. It was a striking
turnabout in attitude for all but Ball.

After their meeting, the group met the President for
lunch. It was a social affair. No business was transacted.
The meal finished, the advisers delivered their verdict to
the President.

He was reportedly greatly surprised at their conclusions.
When he asked them where they had obtained the facts on which
the conclusions were based, the group told him of the briefings
by Habib, DePuy and Carver.

Mr. Johnson knew that the three men had also briefed his
governmental advisers, but he had not received the same
picture of the war as Rostow presented the reports to him.

As a result of the discrepancy, the President ordered
his own direct briefings. At least Habib and DePuy -- and
almost certainly Carver -- had evening sessions with the
President.

Habib was reportedly as frank with the President as he
had been with the advisory group. The President asked tough
questions. "Habib stuck to his guns," one source reported.

On top of all this, Clifford, since he had become Defense
Secretary, came to the same conclusions Robert S. McNamara
had reached -- that the bombing of North Vietnam was not
achieving its objectives.

The impact of this group's recommendation coupled with the new
briefings the President received about conditions and prospects in the
war zone were major factors in cementing the decision not to expand
the war but to attempt a de-escalation. The Joint Chiefs for their
part were still seeking authorization to strike targets with the Hanoi
and Haiphong restricted areas and further escalation of the bombing.

On March 19, a Tuesday, they proposed hitting one target in Hanoi and
one in Haiphong that had previously been rejected by both Rusk and
McNamara plus the Hanoi docks near large population concentrations. 63/
These were probably considered at the noon luncheon at the White House,
but they were apparently not approved as no attacks occurred. The
military leaders, even at this late hour when the disposition of the
administration against any further escalation seemed clear, still pressed
for new targets and new authority.

193 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
