Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

refrain at all times from associating action with Buddha's
birthday and that our initial plan will be to refer all press
queries to Washington and to hold as long as possible simply
to operational factors as explenation. You should raise with
him question of what he will tell generals urging in strongest
terms that he tell them only what we are saying through mili-
tary channel and preferably delay even this until question
arises. If Quat raises question of what we are saying to
Communist side, you will have copies tonight's telk with
Dobrynin and instructions to Kohler by septels and may draw
generally on these for his personal use only.

2. To deal with any possibility adverse Catholic reaction
you should inform Archbishop and/or Nuncio very privately that
any variation in actions in forthcoming period will be USG
decisions not related in any way to Buddha's birthday or any
appeal or issue connected with it. You may of course also
reiterate that any such variations have no effect whatever
on our determination as clearly shown in recent months. We
leave timing this approach to you but believe it should be
done earliest before any speculation arises.

3. At appropriate time you should instruct Zorthian to
report simply that no operations other than reconnaissence
were conducted on each day and to refer press queries, pre-
ferably by indirection, to Washington.

A few hours later, Secretary McNamara, with the concurrence of
Secretary Rusk and McGeorge Bundy, sent the following FLASH joint
State/Defense message through military channels to Ambassador Taylor,
CINCPAC and COMUSMACV: 126/

‘In order to observe reaction of DRV rail and road trans-
portation systems, bombing (including armed recce and other
strike operations) of targets within DRV will cease for several
days effective 2400 12 May Saigon time. CINCPAC should issue
the necessary instructions to US forces and Ambassador should
seek to obtain compliance of VNAF.

During the period in which bombing operations ere suspended,
photo and eyeball reconnaissance flights over DRV, in.so far as
they can be carried out without flak suppression escorts and
within currently approved rules relating to altitudes and lati-
tudes, will. be increased to the level required to permit a
thorough study of lines of communication. The bombing sorties
which would have been directed against the DRV during this
period, to the extent practical, will be targeted against ap-
provriate targets in South Vietnam.

lie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
