Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Later the same month, the U.S. Inter-Agency Committee for Province
Rehabilitation concurred in this plan (with minor reservations) as a
basis for planning and utilization of U.S. assistance. J0/ By October,
the Diem government had made the Strategic Hamlet Program the explicit
focus and unifying concept of its pacification effort. The government-
controlled Times of Viet Nem devoted an entire issue to "1962: The Year
of Strategic Hamlets." 76/7 Ngo Dinh Nhu was unveiled as the "architect
and prime mover" of the program which was the Vietnamese answer to
communist strategy. As Nhu proclaimed: "Strategic hamlets seek to
assure the security of the people in order that the success of the polit-
ical, social, and military revolution might be assured by the enthusiastic
movement of solidarity and self-sufficiency." 7/ President Diem had
earlier put the same thought to an American visitor in clearer words:

The importance of the strategic hamlets goes beyond the
concept of hamlet self defense. They are a means to institute
basic democracy in Vietnam. Through the Strategic Hamlet
Program, the govermnent intends to give back to the hamlet
the right of self-government with its own charter and system
of community law. This will realize the ideas of the consti-
tution on a local scale which the people can understand. [9

By this time, too, influential American circles regarded the
Strategic Hamlet Program as the shorthand designation for a process which
represented a sensible and sound GVN effort. Roger Hilsman had said so
in February to President Kennedy, and found the latter highly receptive.
He continued to say so. 79/ As he advised Assistant Secretary of State
Averell Harriman in late 1962, "The government of Vietnam has oo
developed, and is now acting upon, an effective strategic concept." 80/
Even so lukewarm an enthusiast as the CJCS, General Lyman L. Lemnitzer
could report that " .. . the Strategic Hamlet Program promises solid
benefits, and may well be the vital key to success of the pacification
program."

The public record also shows early support from high U.S. officials
for the Strategic Hamlet Program and recognition of its central role in
GVNN's pacification campaign. Speaking in late April 1962, Under Secretary
of State George W. Ball, commented favorably in the progressive develop-
ment of strategic hamlets throughout RVN as a method of combating
insurgency and as a means of bringing the entire nation "under control

‘of the government." 82. Secretary McNamara told members of the press,

upon his return to Washington from a Pacific meeting in July 1962, that
the Strategic Hamlet Program was the "backbone of President Diem's
program for countering subversion directed against his state." 83/

It is reasonable to conclude from the evidence that official U.S.
awareness kept abreast of Diem's progressive adoption of the Strategic
Hamlet Program as the “unifying concept" in his counterinsurgent effort.
The same officials were constantly bombarded by a series of reports
from a variety of sources describing the progress of the hamlet program
and assessing its efficacy.

2) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
