Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

country, you can't see any deterioration in the military
effort of SVN because of the political situation in the

country?
Secretary McNamara, This is a fair stetement,
Chairman Morgen. You feel that the Vietnamese Army is moving

. * i or , ey
ahead and is cooperating with our forces in there?

Secretary McNamara. Yes. Certain of the affairs or the :
Vietnamese Army heve been affected by the political unrest
of recent months. As Gen. Taylor pointed out, some of their
relatives have been arrested and subjected to a violation

of their personal freedoms and liberties, and undoubtedly
this has tended to turn some of the officers away From sup-
port of their government.

But they are strongly motivated by the desire =O resist
the Communist encroachment...and their anti-Communist .
feelings are stronger than their distrust of government. S
to date there has been no reduction in the effectiveness of
their military operations. 10

There is no record that this express recognition that the bad
political situation might affect the military capability was oes ae
a contingency to be foreseen in the program, or that anyone suggeste
it should be.

Nearly four months later Secretary McNamara had an ee
offer concerning his view of the situation at the time of oo ee
Appearing once more in Executive Session to testify on the aut ape: OR
bill for the fiscal year 1965, before the House Committee on gars
Services on 27 January 1964, the Secretary was asked by Mr. Chamberman
of the House Committee to explain why

his press conference comments on the situation
“the day before were clearly more optimistic than
those in his Congressional statement. Both were
more optimistic than recent news reports from
Viet lam. 1i/

e i int Report to the
In response, the Secretary went back to his Joint
Preeident of 2 October, to cite again the caveat which had been expressed
as follows.

The political situation in South Viet Nam remains
deeply serious. The United States has made clear
its continuing opposition to any repressive actions
in South Viet Nam. While such actions have not yet
Significantly affected the military effort, they
could do so in the future. 12/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
