Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

indicating an intent to accelerate independence for the Associated States;
(c) French agreement to continue their Expeditionary Corps in Indochina.
Thus Congressional opposition put the brake on a possible unilateral U.S.
intervention. 19/ According to a subsequent State Department Summary:

"It was the sense of the meeting that the U.S. should not
intervene alone but should attempt to secure the cooperation of
other free nations concerned in Southeast Asia, and that if such
cooperation could be assured, it was probable that the U.S. Cong-
ress would authorize U.S. participation in such ‘United Action. '"20/

The following day, April 4, Dulles and Radford met with the
President at the White House. The President reached the decision to
intervene only upon the satisfaction of the three conditions necessary
for the U.S. "to commit belligerent acts" in Indochina. There would have
to be a coalition "with active British Commonwealth participation"; a
"full political understanding with France and other countries,” and
Congressional approval. 21/

President Eisenhower clearly did not want the U.S. to inter-
vene alone. He also was very concerned with having broad Congressional
support for any step which might involve the U.S. in awar. As Sherman
Adams later observed:

"Having avoided one total war with Red China the year
before in Korea when he had United Nations support, he
[/Bisenhower/ was in no mood to provoke another one in Indo-
China by going it alone in a military action without the
British and other Western Allies. He was also determined
not to become involved militarily in any foreign conflict
without the approval of Congress. He had had trouble
enough convincing some Senators that it was even necessary
to send small groups of noncombatant Air Force technicians
to Indo-China." 22/

e. British Oppose "United Action"

From April 11 to 14, Secretary Dulles visited London and Paris
to attempt to obtain British and French commitments to support his pro-
posal for "United Action." According to President Eisenhower, Dulles felt
that he had been given assurance of Congressional support for "United
Action" if the allies approved his plan. 23/

Dulles found the British opposed to any type of collective
military action prior to the Geneva Conference. Dulles explained, accord-
ing to Eden's account, that the U.S. had concluded that the French could
no longer deal with the situation in Indochina, militarily or politically,
alone. If the French position in Indochina collapsed, the consequences in
the rest of Southeast Asia would be grave. U.S. air and naval forces were

B-2) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
