Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

attention to the Delta (IV Corps) region, which contains eight
out of Vietnam's 15 million people and is its chief rice bowl
..-Clearly we must dovetail the military's sweep operations
and civil pacification. My impression is that, since the
military are moving ahead faster than the civil side we need
to beef up the latter to get it in phase. There's little
point in the military clearing areas the civil side can't
pacify. On the other hand, security is the key to pacifica-
tion; people won't cooperate and the cadre can't function till
an area is secure...

"Somehow the civil side appears reluctant to call on mili-
tary resources, which are frequently the best and most readily
available. I put everyone politely on notice that I would
have no such hesitations -- provided that the case was demon-
strable -- and thet this was the express request of the
Secretary of Defense." 15/ [Cited Supra./

In August of 1966, Komer produced the longest of his papers, and the
one he considered his most important. Its title was "Giving a New Thrust
to Pacification." In addition to discussing the substance of pacification,
the paper made some further organizational suggestions, which clearly fore-
shadowed the second reorganization of the Mission which took place after
the Menila conference. It is worth quoting in some length (all underlining
is part of the original):

"There is a growing consensus that the US/GVN pacification
effort needs to be stepped up, that management of our pacifica-
tion assets is not yet producing an acceptable rate of return
for our heavy investments, and that pacification operations
should be brought more abreast of our developing military effort
against the NVA and VC main force. The President has expressed
this view, and so has Ambassador Lodge among others.

"T, What is pacification? In one sense, "pacification" can be
used to encompass the whole of the military, political, and civil
effort in Vietnem., But the term needs to be narrowed down for
operational purposes, and can be reasonably well separated out

as a definable problem area.

"Tf we divide the US/GVN problem into four main components,
three of them show encouraging progress. The campaign against
the major vc /NVA units is in high gear, the constitutional pro-
cess seems to be evolving favorably, and we expect to contain
inflation while meeting most needs of the civil economy. But
there is a fourth problem area, that of securing the country-

‘ gide and getting the peasant involved in the struggle against
the Viet Cong, where we are lagging way behind. It is this
problem area which I would term pacification...

66 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
