Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the mistake of assuming that there is any substitute for victory
against aggression where it shows its open face -- inside the
borders of South Vietnam itself.

Second -- and at the same time -- we will carry out measured
but effective actions against military targets in North Vietnam.
These actions will be reported to the United Nations Security
Council under the Provisions of Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter -- and each such report will include a full account of
the continuing acts of aggression which make our actions neces-
sary. These actions will stop when the aggression stops.

Third, we will press with urgency for talks designed to bring

' an end to the aggression and its threat to peace. I have today
instructed Ambassador Stevenson to seek such action urgently, in
the Security Council of the United Nations, and if that body
should be hamstrung by any veto, we shall then press for talks
in another appropriate forum. We believe that in any such talks
the first object must be an end of aggression, and we believe
that the government in Hanoi must be brought to the conference
room. Qur common purpose -- and our only purpose -- is to
restore the peace and domestic tranquility which others have so
savagely attacked. END QUOTE

Several aspects of the message are of interest. First, it features-
intensified pacification as the first order of business and as a major
point in the contemplated Presidential announcement. This stress on
action in the South reflected a serious concern at high levels in the
White House and the State Department at that time, that a growing pre-
occupation with action against the North would be likely to cause the
US Mission and the GVN leadership to neglect the all-important struggle
within the borders of South Vietnam. Second, the description of the air
strike program in the message is extremely cursory, suggesting that the
President at this time still wished to preserve as much flexibility as*
possible concerning the future scope and character of the program. And
third, the message reveals the President's intention, as of that date, to
take the DRV aggression issue and the US bombing response promptly before
the UN Security Council -- an intention that was dropped several days
later in favor of @ quite different approach, namely the UK/USSR
Co-Chairmen initiative recounted below. In actuality, instead of mount-
ing a major Ul approach, the President contented himself initially with
a brief public statement 63/ of US objectives in Vietnam, which formed
the keynote of the official line, and was to be frequently quoted by
Administration efficials in subsequent weeks:

‘ As I have said so many, many times, and other Presidents
ahead of me have said, our purpose, our objective there is
clear. That purpose and that objective is to join in the de-
fense and protection of freedom of a brave people who are

under attack that is controlled and that is directed from
outside their country. :

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
