Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

naval action "against all suitable military targets in China," when possi-

ble in conjunction with British and French forces. _8/

In prescribing these recommended actions, the NSC focused on the less
likely contingency of a Chinese intervention rather than the more likely
contingency of the continued deterioration of the French position in
Indochina itself. It did so despite the fact that NSC 124/2 conceded that
the "primary threat" was the situation in Indochina itself (increasing sub-
versiye efforts by indigenous communist forces, increased guerrilla activity,
and increased Viet Minh civil control over population and territory).
Apparently, the NSC wanted to make clear that direct U.S. involvement in
Indochina was to be limited to dealing with direct Chinese involvement. In
the absence of this contingency, however, and to meet the existing situation
in Indochina, the NSC recommended that the United States increase its level
of aid to French Union forces but "without relieving the French authorities
of their basic military responsibility for the defense of the Associated
States." _9/

h, Republican Administration and Far East

Two events in 1953 served to deepen the American commitment in
Indochina. The first was the arrival of a Republican Administration
following a long period in which the G.0.P. had persistently accused the
Truman Administration of being responsible for the “loss" of China to
communism. The writings and speeches of John Foster Dulles before the
election left no doubt that he regarded Southeast Asia as a key region in
the conflict with communist "imperialism} and that it was important to draw
the line of containment north of the Rice Bowl of Asia -- the Indochina
peninsula. 10/ In his first State of the Union Message on February 3,
1953, President Eisenhower promised a "new, positive foreign policy." He
went on to link the communist aggression in Korea and Malaya with Indochina.
Dulles subsequently spoke of Korea and Indochina as two flanks, with the
principal enemy -- Red China -- in the center. A special study mission
‘headed by Representative Walter Judd, a recognized Republican spokesman on
Asia, surveyed the Far East and reported on its view of the high stakes
involved:

"The area of Indochina is immensely wealthy in rice,
rubber, coal, and iron ore. Its position makes it a
strategic key to the rest of Southeast Asia. If Indochina
should fall, Thailand and Burma would be in extreme danger,
Malaya, Singapore and even Indonesia would become more
vulnerable to the Communist power drive....Communism would
then be in an exceptional position to complete its per-
version of the political and social revolution that is
spreading through Asia....The Communists must be prevented
from achieving their objectives in Indochina.” 11/

The Republican Administration clearly intended to prevent the loss of
Indochina by taking a more forthright, anti-communist stand.

A-lO TOP SECRET - Sensitive
