War

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-

Saigon, Vietnam, Oct 12 (Reuters) -- South Vietnamese military
sources welcomed today President Kennedy's decision to send his
military adviser, General Taylor, here this week.

Sources close to President Ngo Dinh Diem said he did not
feel there was a need here yet for troops of the United States
or Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.

The sources said the South Vietnamese President was convinced
that Vietnam's Army increased in size and better equipped by
increased United States aid can defeat the Communists. 11

But a day later, the public position of the Vietnamese had shifted
noticeably. From a New York Times dispatch from Saigon:

One question receiving considerable attention here in the
light of the Taylor mission is the desirability of sending United
States troops to South Vietnam.

The prospect of United States troop involvement is understood
to have advanced a step here in the sense that the South Vietnamese
Government is reported to be willing to consider such involvement
which it had formerly rejected.

However, it is understood that South Vietnamese deliberations
still fall far short of the stage wherein Saigon would be ready
to request United States forces. 12/

But in private discussions with the U.S. ambassador, Diem had turned
around completely. From Nolting's cable:

Following major requests:

(1) An additional squadron of AD-6 fighter bombers (in lieu of pro-
grammed T-28's) and delivery as soon as possible.

(2) The sending of US civilian contract pilots for helicopters
and transport planes (C-/7s), for 'non-combat' operations.

(3) US combat unit or units to be introduced into SVN as 'combat-
trainer units’. Proposed use would be to station a part of this
foree in northern part of SVN near 17th parallel to free ARVN
forces presently there for anti-guerrilla combat in high plateau.
Thuan also suggested possibility stationing some US forces in
several provincial seats in highlands of central Vietnam.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
