Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

advisors for South Vietnam. This, in turn, implied at the very mini-
mun a period of long exposure to the operational problem (and personal-
ities) with which these advisors would deal. In the event, it was
decided to expand both the military and sector (provincial military)
advisory efforts without any such long term exposure. These questions
were settled in detail when Secretary McNamara met in mid-January 1962 at
Honolulu with the principal managers of the U.S, effort. It was decided
to establish battalion level military advisory teams within ARVN, each
to consist of either 5 (infantry battalion) or 3 (artillery battalion)
personnel. Each province (sector) would receive 3 U.S. advisors, one
officer and 2 enlisted intelligence specialists. The Civil Guard would
be trained in a series of 6 training centers by 120 advisors (20 in each
center ) plus 12 mobile teams of 3 men each. The SDC would be trained in
30 centers. Th] Secretary Meclamara made it clear that he wanted these
deployments completed as quickly as possible. He suggested that if an
ARVN unit was not prepared to receive its advisors the designated indiv-
iduals be sent to RVN and placed temporarily with another unit to gain
experience. 75/ He agreed that temporary duty assignments to Vietnam
were generally undesirable and asked the JCS to address the question of
optimum tour length for advisors. 16/

The length of time a military member spent in Vietnam at that time
varied slightly from service to service, according to whether or not
dependents accompanied the serviceman and whether he served in Saigon or
in some other part of the country. In October 1961 it was allegedly
decided at OSD level ~-- without consulting the services -~ to make the
tour of duty 30 months with dependents and 18 without dependents rather
than the 24: and 12 month tours that were then typical. Tt] The effect
of this decision would have been to increase the field advisors' tours of
duty from one year to one and a half years. Each of the assignment
branches within the Army opposed this change as one which would be
inequitable unless reflected in changed tour length for other "ynaccom=
panied" (by dependent) tours. ‘The order was not put into effect. Thus,
there was some background against which to reexamine the time which

advisors (among others) should spend in RVN. ‘The decision -- again
based on considerations of equity in "hardship" assignments, health, ane
resultant morale issues -- was to retain the one year tour in the field.

U.S, EXPECTATIONS: THE BENEFITS FROM MORE ADVISORS

To sum up the decision to expand the advisory effort to battalion
and province level, it was one reached without extended study or debate.
There was neither opposition to it nor any comprehensive explication of

* It has remained basically unchanged, it should be noted, until the
present. An unstructured program of voluntary 6 month extensions was
inaugurated throughout Vietnam in 1967, a voluntary extension program
begun for "selected officers" in key positions in the same year, and
a, small program initiated in 1968 by which selected Province Advisors
would agree to serve two years in Vietnam, then receive almost one’
year's training prior to deployment. No officers have departed the
U.S. under this last program as of the present writing (mid-1968).

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
