Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

'-- Place the RD and PF under the RD Ministry.. =

-- Esteblish a single line of command to the province
chiefs...

-- Remove the Division from the pacification chain of
command...

-- Strengthen the authority of the Province Chiefs...

-- Appoint civilian chiefs in selected provinces and
districts...

"B. Parallel strengthening of the structure is essential. U.S.
leadership has often sparked major pacification steps by the GVN.

The structure for managing pacification advice to the GVN, and direct
U.S. military/civilian support, have evolved slowly as the U.S. con-
tributions have grown. Once it was possible to coordinate the U.S.
pacification effort through an interagency committee for strategic
hemlets. Later the Mission Council concept was used extensively.

In the wake of the Honolulu Conference, the President appointed Am-
passador Porter to take charge of the non-military effort in Vietnam.
Several highly qualified people now give Porter the nucleus of a
coordination and operations staff. However...the U,S, management
structure must be strengthened considerably more.

"There are three basic alternatives, cach building on the pre-
sent structure, which could provide the needed result. Two of them
are based on the principle of a ‘single manager' over both civilian
and military assets by assigning command responsibility either to
Porter or Westmoreland. The third accepts a continued division
between the civil and military sides for numerous practical reasons,
put calls for strengthening the management structure of both.

"Alternative No. 1 -- Give Porter operational control over all
U.S. pacification activity...

"Alternative No. 2 -- Retain the present separate civil and

military command channels but strengthen the management structure
of both MACV and the U.S. Mission. This option, recognizing the
practical difficulties of putting U.S. civilian and military
personnel under a single chief, would be to settle for improved
coordination at the Saigon level.

"To facilitate improved coordination, however, it would require
strengthening the organization for pacification within MACV and the
U.S. Mission. MACV disposes of by far the greater number of Ameri-
cans working on pacification in the field. It has advisory teams
spending most of their time on pacification in 200 out of 230
districts and in all 43 provinces. These teams -- not counting

a .

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
