Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) 
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968 
(16 Vols.) 
2. Military Pressures Against NVN (3 Vols.) 
b. July - October 1964 
-
~ 
."----- -
--
~---"'---" -
- _. 
-
---~--...-------------
-
~~-
- --~-~- -- ~--~---~--
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TV , 
(~ . 2. ( h ) 
EVOLUTlm~ OF' THE ViM 
Military Pressures Against ~:orth Vietnam 
July - October .~2.64 
·0295 
Sec Def Cuut 1..1. 
X-_~ __ .. ____ "_ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NVN: 
JULY - OCTOBER, 1964 
SUMMARY and ANALYSIS 
During tpe spring and summer of 1964, there was disquiet about 
the situation in South Vietnam and disillusion with on-going U. S. actions 
to right that situation. 
During the third quarter of 1964, a consensus 
developed vTi thin the Johnson Administration that some form of continual 
overt pressures mounting in severity against North Vietnam soon vTould be 
required. 
The purpose of these pressures was t'rrofold : 
(1 ) to effect DRV 
will and capabilities in order to persuade and force the leadership i n 
Hanoi to halt their support and direction of the VTar in the South; and 
(2) to induce negotiat~ons at some future point in time on our terms after 
North Vietnam had been hurt and convinced of our resolve . 
This consensus 
vlaS in an early formative stage - - it had become an idea, not a program 
for action; it was a belief, not as yet fully staffed and considered . 
Because of this and because of important tactical considerations (the 
impending U.S. elections, the 'instability of the GVN, and the need to 
produce further evidence of VC infiltration into the South) implementation 
of such a policy was deferred. 
Nevertheless, the groundHork was being 
laid. 
The Tonkin Gulf reprisal constituted an important firebreak, and 
the Tonkin Gulf Resolution set U.S. public support for virtually any action . 
Since the fall of Diem in November 1963, the political situation in 
South Vietnam had been deteriorating. 
The Khanh Government had succeeded 
Min~ in January 1964, but had demonstrated only greater capacity for surviv-
abili ty, not more capacity for reversing the trend to\·rard collapse . 
In 
the wake of the Tonkin Gulf reprisals, vlhen South Vietnamese morale was 
still temporarily inflated, Khanh made a pold bid to consolidate his personal 
power and i mpose semi- dictatorial rule . 
He vTas brought to heel, hovvever, in 
l ess than a month by the military junta which continued to operate behind 
the scenes . 
By September, the most salient aspect of the confused political 
situation in South Vietnam was the likelihood that it would continue its 
dmmvTard slide into the foreseeable future . 
In this setting, a program of covert military pressures against North 
Vietnam already had been set in process . 
These were basically of three 
kinds : 
(1) low level recce with armed escort over Laos; (2) De Soto patrols 
within 4 n .m. of the Iif\TN coast to acq.uire visual, electronic , and photo-
graphic intelligence ; and (3) Oplan 34-A vThich included a variety of anti-
i nfiltration, sabotage, and pSYl,rar measures . 
The portent of these actions 
vlaS being conveyed to the North Vietnamese through private and public 
cpannels . 
A Canadia.n, Blair Seaborn, vTas sent to Hanoi to state that U. S. 
objectives Here limited but that our comrnitment was deep , and that "in the 
event of escalation the greatest devastation "loJQuld of course result for the 
DRVN itself . " 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
i 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP3T - Sensitive 
Neither the situation in SVN nor the failure of Hanoi to acquiesce 
to our threats diminished the basic U. S. cOllUnitment. 
NSAM 288 expounding 
the need to do what ,'Tas necessary to preserve an "independent non- communist 
South VietnamfT vlaS the guiding policy document. 
At no time in this period 
was the NSAM 288 commitment brought into quest~on. Rather, American con-
cern was focused on hO,'l the U. S. could retrieve the situation . 
The usual 
palliatives - - more aid, more advice, more pressure on the GVN to reform, 
and more verbal threats to Hanoi -- were no longer seen as satisfactory. 
Nor did it appear to U. S. decision-makers that He faced a stark choice 
behTeen complete U. S. ,vi thdraT.val from the struggle or a large scale intro-
duction of U.S. ground forces. 
Nor did the l eadership in Washington believe 
that a massive bombing campaign against the North need be seriousl y con-
sidered __ I although such a program vIas proposed by the JCS . 
With all these 
alternati ves implicitly ruled out at this time, the choice vlas both obvious 
and inevitable. 
Although it did not take the form of decision, it was agreed 
that the U.S. should at an unspecified date in the future begin an incre-
mental series of gradually mounting strikes against North Vietnam. 
The only 
real questions were precisely Hhat actions should be taken and when? 
None 
of these early fall discussions in lilashington really confronted the hard 
issues of ,vhat a bombing campaign would buy and "That it vTould cost . 
These 
hard -headed discussions, to some extent, took place in the last few months 
of 1964. 
'The key events in this period were the Tonkin Gulf incidents of 
August 2nd and 4th and the U. S. r eprisal on North Vietnam PT boats and 
bases on August 5th . 
The explanation for the DRV attack on U. S. ships 
remains puzzling (perhaps it ivas simply a Ivay of warning and warding off 
U. S. patrols close to North Vietnam borders) . 
The svlift U. S. reaction was 
to be expected . 
lilhile there was some momentary uncertainty about the 
actuality of the second attack on August 4th, confirming evidence of the 
atta.ck vTaS received before the U. S. reprisal vTas launched . 
The U. S. reprisal 
represented the carrying out of reco®nendations made to the President by his 
principal advisers earlier that summer and subsequently placed on the shelf. 
The existence of these previous reconL1'Jlendations 'tTi th plan_ning down to 
detailed targeting made possible the immediate U. S. reaction when the crisis 
came . 
At the same time as U. S. reprisals vrere taken, President Johnson decided 
to act on another recommendation that had been under consideration since at 
least May -- a Congress ional resolution of support for U. S. policy. 
~ihereas 
in the earlier discussions, such a r esolution had been proposed as a vehicle 
for mobilizing Congressional and public support behind an escalating campaign 
of pressures against the North, the President, in the midst of an election 
campaign, nOvT felt i mpelled to use it to soliuify support for his overall 
Vietnam policy. 
On August 5th he sent a message to Congress on the Tonkin 
incidents and asked for passage of a joint resolution endorsing his policy. 
The resolution itself >vas o::ie prepared by the Administration and introduced 
on its behalf by the Chairmen of the Foreign Affairs Cormni ttees in the tyro 
Houses . It via.S passed vTi th near unanimous support · on August 7th . 
ii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The net effect af the sHift U.S. reprisals and the Cangressianal 
Resolution was to dramati cally demonstrate, publicly state and formally 
record the corrullitments to South Vietnam a.nd within Southeast Asia. that had 
been made internal U. S. policy by NSA1VI 288 in March 1964 . 
They were also 
conceived and intended as a clear com.m.1.mica tiol" to Hanoi of "lvhat it could 
expect if it continued to pursue its current course of action . 
They were 
portents of the futUre designed to demonstrate the firr~ness of U. S. resol ve 
and the direction its palicy "I·18.S tending . 
The psychological impact of the 
raids on the Administration and the American public is also significant . 
They marked the crossing of an important threshold in the war, and i t was 
accomplished vTi th virtually no domestic criticism, indeed , I,Ti th an evident 
increase in public su~~ort for the Administration . 
The precedent for strikes 
against the North was-thus established and at very little apparent cost . 
There "lms a real cost, ho\vever . 
The number of unused measures shart of dir ect 
military action against the North ha.d been depleted , 
Greater visible commi t -
ment was purchased at the price of reduced flexibil ity . 
But, a worried Administration went to some lengths to insure that the 
strikes did nat bind or commit it to any future policies or actions and to 
have it understood that the strikes had been pure and simple reprisals of 
the one of a kind variety . 
Yet, for all these reasons , when a decision to' 
strike the Narth "lvas faced again, it "I'TaS much easier to take. 
The Tonkin reprisals "lvere Ividely regarded vTi thin the Administration as 
an effective, although limited demonstration of the firmness of American 
r esolve. 
However, they also served to stiffen that resol ve and to deepen 
the commitment. 
Several officials within the Aruninistration, incl uding 
Ambassador Taylor, felt that to have any lasting impact this demonstration 
of resolve ,vould have to be follO"lved up by other continuing actions, in an 
i ncreasing tempo . 
The positive short-term effect of the reprisals in rai sing 
Sauth Vietnamese marale was noted as an important by-product of the strikes 
and offered as ane justification for cantinuing pressures against the North. 
Also figuring importantly in calculations af resolve and intent was the 
appreciable impravement in our position in Laos as a result of the vigorous 
spring offensive by Laotian Gavernment farces . 
This i mprovement had led us 
to' oppose a 14-nation conference on Laos for fear of placing the nevT gains 
in jeopardy, and convinced many that only military measures were unambiguously 
understaod by Hanoi! s corrmmnist rulers . 
This , h01dever, Has tempered by a 
countervailing concern not to' ~rovoke by U.S . action any communist military 
escalation in Laos. 
-
Quite another set of argu..rnents for strikes against the North were 
advanced by 'i,l)"alt Rostm-T, then Counselor of the State Department, in a paper 
that circulated v'idely through the Admin:'..strat~.on in August 1964 . 
The 
!!Rostow Thesis rr 
argued that externally supported insurgencies could only 
bE< successfully dealt "I-lith by striking at their sources of support and 
neutralizing them. 
The objective of such attacks wauld be psychological 
rather than purely military . 
They "l"Tould be designed to alter the aggressar !s 
calculation of interests in supporting the insurgency through the fear of 
iii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECH}~i' - Sensitive 
further military and economic damage, the fear of involvement in a I'Tider 
conflict, the fear of internal political uphea.val and the fear of greater 
dependence on a major communist power . 
Any incidental improvement in morale 
in the country troubled by insurgency or improvement in bargaining leverage 
were to be regar,led as bonuses. 
To achieve th2 desired effect, a care-
fully orchestrated series of escalating military measures, coupled \-lith 
simultaneous political, economic and psychological pressures was called for . 
The IIthesis II "\-las articulated in general terms, but the i mmediate case in 
everyone's mind was, of course, Southeast Asia . 
A thorough critique of Rostow ' s paper was prepared in OSD/ISA with 
inputs from State 's Policy Planning Council. 
This analysis argued that 
the validity of the IIthesis ll would depend on two variables : 
(1) the extent 
of tbe conmitment of the nation supporting the insurgency; and (2) the 
degree to which vital U. S. interests Ivere at stake in the conflict . 
The 
latter question having been settled with respect to 
South Vietnam by 
NS~~ 288, the remaining problem was whether the kinds of actions ROStovl 
recormnended could succeed given the level of determined commitment of the 
North Vietnamese . 
For the Rostow approach to succeed, the DRV "\-lOuld .have 
to be persuaded that: 
(1) the U.S. was taking limited action to achieve 
limited goals; (2) the U. S. commitment was total; and (3) the U. S. had estab-
lished a sufficient domestic consensus to see the policy through . If the 
DRV was not so convinced, the approach would fail unless there were a major 
U. S. military involvement in the war. 
The critique concluded that the 
public opinion problems of suc~an approach, both domestic and international, 
would be very great, and that in vie,v of the inherent problems of imple-
menting and managing such a discriminating policy, it had poor chances of 
success. 
These reservations notwithstanding, the outlook embodied in the 
IIRostO"\-l thesisll came to dominate a good deal of Administration thinking on 
the question of pressures against the North in the months ahead . 
All of the pressures-against-the-North thinking came to a head in 
the strategy meeting of the principals on September 7th . It appears that 
a rather narrOvl range of proposals "\-ms up for consideration. 
One program 
proposal came from the JCS . It was a repeat of the 94-target list program 
which the JCS had recommended on August 26th . 
The JCS called for deliberate 
attempts to provoke the DRV into taking acts which could then be ansvlered 
by a systematic U. S. air campaign . 
The JCS argued that such actions were 
nOl'/' lIessential to preventing complete collapse of the U. S. position in the 
RVN and SRA., II because "continuation of present or foreseeable programs 
limi ted to the RVN will not produce the desired result . II 
The Chiefs were 
supported by ISA in their provocation approach. 
For ISA, ASD McNaughton 
argued that Our .acts and the DRV response "should be likely to provide . 
good grounds fo~' us to escalate if we "\-r~~shed
. II 
McNaughton's approach "\-las 
for a "gradual squeeze , II not si mply a. tit-for-tat contingency and unlike 
the quick,. all-out proposals of the JCS. 
The prindpal conferees at this September meeting did not believe that 
deliberate acts of provocation should be undertaken "in the immediate future 
while the GVN is still struggling to its feet ." 
HOI'rever, they apparently 
r eached a consensus that they might recommend such actions --
II depending on 
GVN progress and communist reaction in the meantime ll -- by early October . 
iv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
7 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
This deferral decision Has strongly supported by Mr . McCone of the CIA 
and Ambassador Taylor . 
Ambassador Taylor, revising his previous pos i tion , 
believed that the conflict should not be escalated to a level beyond South 
Vietnamese capacities to manage it. 
He opposed overt actions against 
North Vietnam as too risky and urged instead t:1at further measures to 
strengthen the GVN be taken first. 
Similarly, Secretary McN~mara affirmed 
his understanding that "He are not acting more strongly because there i s 
a clear hope of strengthening the GVN." McNamara ivent on to urge, however , 
that the Hay be kept open for stronger actions even if the GVN did not 
improve or in the event the Ivar ivere Hidened by the communists . 
In notes 
t aken at this meeting the President asked : 
trCan He really strengthen the 
GVN?" 
It is important to differentiate the consensus of the principals at 
this September meeting from the vieHs Hhich they had urged on the President 
in the preceding spring . 
In the spring the use of force had been clearly 
contingent upon a major reversal -- principally in Laos -- and had been 
advanced with the apparent assumption that military acti ons hopefully vlOuld 
not be required . 
No,v, hOHever, their vieHs Here advanced Hi th a sense that 
such actions Here inevitable . 
The r esults of the September meeting Here recorded in NSN~ 314. 
The 
actions that Here approved against the DRV for the next three month period 
Here highly limited and marginal i n character . 
They included resQmption 
of the off- shore U. S. naval patrols , resumption of covert GVN coastal opera-
tions against the North, limited air and ground operations in the Laotian 
corridor, and a preparedness to respond to any further DRV attacks on a 
tit-for-tat basis . 
From the September meeting forward, there i·ms little basic disagreement 
among the principals on the need for military actions against the North . 
What prevented action for the time being Has a set of tactical considerations . 
The President Ivas in the midst of an election campaign in which he vms 
presenting himself as the candidate of reason and restraint as opposed to 
the quixotic Barry GoldHater . 
Other concerns were the aforementioned shaki-
ness of the GVN, the uncertainty as to China ' s response to an escalation, 
the desire not to upset the delicate Laotian equation, the need to desi gn 
Hhatever actions Here taken so as to achieve the maximttm public and Con-
gressional support, and the implicit belief that overt actions at this time 
might bring pressure for premature negotiations--that is, negotiations before 
the DRV VTas hurting . 
In su:nllnary, the period Salol the development of the 
consensus on military pressures against the North and the decis i on to defer 
them for temporary reasons of tactics. 
v 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
'i 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve 
MILITPulY PRESSURES AGAINST NORTH VIETNAM 
July~Octob~r 1964 
Table of Contc:nts l!nd Outline 
I. 
PROLOGUE : 
ACTIONS AND PROGFk\fS UNDER1-JAY •••••••• 0 ••••• 
II. 
THE TONKIN GULF CRISIS •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
The First Incident •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
The Second Incident ••••••••• •••••• •••• ~ ••••••••••• 
The Respons~ in 'Hashington •••••••••••• 0 •••• .••••••• 
Broadening the Inpe,ct ••••••••••••• Q ••••••••••• 0 ••• 
III. 
POST-TONKIN POLICY ASSES$iENTS •• 0 0 ~ ••••••• 0 •• 0 •••••••• 
DiJ-Aern!T\ilS in L~os e •• ~ e " 04' • 0 • 00000 •• 0 eo • 0 0 ••••••••• 0 • 
Concern over Pressures for Negotiations ••••••••••• 
Concern over Tonkin Reprisal Si&~a16 •••••••••••••• 
Rcasscr-'cion of the RostO'.-r Thesis •••••••••••••••••• 
Accomp:inying Pa.use i n Pres stU' s •• 0 0 •• 0 •••• 0 ••••••• 
IV 0 
NK,{T COURSES OF ACTION •••••••• 0 ••••••••••••••••• 0 •••• • 
Strc,t eg'j' Nect ing in S cptE..mb~r . 0 ••••••••• 0 ••••••••• 
Implcm~nting Actions ••••••• • •••••••••••••••••••••• 
Nava1 Operatj.ons ••• 0 ••••••••••••• 0 " •••• o •••••• 
Negotiating Postt~e Re Laos •• oo ••••••••••• o ••• o ••• 
Anticl.p,xtion of 1-lider Action ••••• 0 • 00.8' • 0 •• 0 ••• 0 • 
Rescrlations 0 ••• 0 
• 
0 • 
0 0 . 's. .. $ 0 0 
0 • t. 00 •• o. e 0 ~ e _ •• & 0 
i 
Page 
1 
5 
5 
6 
8 
11 
16 
16 
18 
19 
21 
22 
25 
25 
27 
27 
28 
30 
32 
32 
34 
TOP SECR"S"r - SE:nsiti'TC 
( 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Differing Agency Policy Vievs •••• oo •••••••••••••••• 
Saigon Embassy views •. ooo ••• o •••••••••••••••••• 
OSD \"ie\is. 0 0 ••• 0 • 0 0 0 •• 0 ••• 0 0 •••• 0 8 •• 0 •••• 0 ••••• 
CIA. Vie1"lS ••• 0 • 0 •• " • 
, 
0 •• 0 •• 0 0 • 0 ••• .0 0 • c ••• 0 •••••• 
37 
37 
39 
40 
41 
41 
TAB A ~ Te).t of Original Congressional R:asolution, 
co May 1964 
TAB B - Secreta.ry McNamare. t s Prepared Test mony ~ 
20 Fc'bru3.l"".)'" 1968 
TAB C - Text of Congrcssionnl Resolution, 
7 August 1964 
ii 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
n 
::x: 
~ 
z o 5 
~ 
12. 
DATE 
17 Jul 1964 
30 Jul 1961.f 
31 Jul 1964 
1 Aug 1964 
2 Aug 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NV~, JULY - OCTOBER 1964 
CHRONOLOGY 
EVEN'll OR DOCUMENT 
DESOTO naval patrols 
off North Vietnam re-
authorized 
Covert GVN attack on 
North Vietnam 
USS M.A.DDOX resumes 
patrol off North 
Vietnam 
British seek meeting 
of three Laotian princes 
China urges USSR not 
to r esign Geneva co-
chairmanship 
DRV PT boats attack 
MADDOX 
1 
DESCRIPTION 
Authority was given to resume the 
DESOTO destroyer patrols off North 
Vietnam. 
They had been suspended 
since March . 
The night before the USS MADDOX 
is to resume her patrols off the 
North Vietnamese coast, South Viet-
namese commandos r aid two North 
Vietnamese islands . 
After a si x month suspensi on, the 
USS MADDOX re sumed the DESOTO patrols 
off the coast of North Vietnam. 
Actiag on Souvanna Phouma's request, 
the Briti sh government urged the 
ICC members to arrange a meeting 
among the three Laotian p::Jlitical 
factions as represented by the three 
rival princes. 
The Chinese Communists urged the 
USSR not to carry out i ts threat 
to abandon its co-chairman role in 
the Geneva settlements , apparently 
vie'tTi ng such a development as j eo-
pardizing the possibilities of a 
Geneva settlement of the current 
Laotian crisis. 
Apparentl y mistaking the MADDOX 
for South Vietnamese , three DRV 
pa tro'. boats launched a torpedo 
and machine gun attack on her. 
Responding :i.m.rnediately to the at-
tack, and with the help of air 
support from the nearby carrier 
TICONDEROGA , the MADDOX destroyed 
TOP SECRET - Sens:i.tive 
DATE 
3 Aug 1964 
3 Aug 1964 
4 Aug 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
U. S. protest through 
ICC 
DESOTO patrol resumed 
GVN again attacks 
North Vietnam 
Second DRV naval attack 
on DESOTO patrol 
Reprisal alerts 
NSC meeting 
2 
DESCRIPTION 
one of the attacking boats and 
damaged the other two. 
The MADDOX, 
under 7th Fleet orders, retired 
to South Vietnamese waters where 
she is joined by the C. TURNER JOY . 
A. stiff U. S. protest of the attack 
on the MADDOX is dispatched to 
Hanoi through the ICC . 
It warns 
that "grave conseq,uences" will re-
SQlt from any future attacks on 
U. S. forces . 
The JCS approved a CINCPAC req,uest 
to resume the DESOTO patrol at 
1350 hours , ordered the C. TURNER 
JOY to be added to it and author-
ized active defensive measures for 
the destroyers and their support-
i ng aircraft . 
The President announced 
the action later that day . 
The Rhon River estuary and the 
Vinh Sonh radar installation were 
bombarded QDder cover of darkness . 
At about 2140 hours, after several 
hours of shado'VTing, a second PT 
boat attack on the augmented DESOTO 
task force was launched . 
This en-
gagement in the dark lasted about 
three hours and resulted in two 
patrol boats destroyed . 
At 0030 hours (5 Aug 1964 Vietnam 
time ), "alert orders" for possi-
ble reprisal air strikes were given 
to the TICOl\TDEROGA and a second 
carrier, the CONSTELL~TION , that 
had been steaming toward the area 
from Hong Kong since Aug 3. 
At 1230, \-I!ashington time, the NSC 
convened after a brief meeting 
of the JCS ,vi th the President . 
The JCS, McNamara and others recom-
mended r eprisals against the patrol 
craft and their bases . 
This the 
President approved. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
5 Aug 1964 
6 Aug 1964 
7 Aug 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCill.ffiNT 
2nd NSC meeting 
Congressional briefing 
U Thant calls for lL~ ­
nation conference on 
Laos 
Presidential message 
to Congress 
Tonkin Gulf Resolu-
tions discussed in 
committee 
Force deployments 
Tonkin Gulf Re-solu-
tion passes Congress 
3 
DESCRIPTION 
After a confusing afternoon in 
which the attacks were double-checked 
and verified, the NSC met again 
at 1700, confirmed the reprisal 
order, and discussed incremental 
force deployments to the Western 
Pacific . 
At 1845 the President met with 
16 Congressional leaders, briefed 
them on the proposed attacks 
and informed them of his inten-
tion to ask for a joint Congres-
sional resolution of support . 
None raised objections. 
In an unrelated development , 
UN Secretary General U Thant 
called for the rescheduling 
of the 14-nation conference 
to deal with the Laotian situa-
tion. 
In a formal message to both 
houses of Congress, the Presi-
dent requested passage of a 
joint resolution of support 
for U. S. policy in Southeast 
Asia. 
Concurrently, identical 
draft resolutions prepared by 
the executive branch were intro-
duced in the Senate by Senator 
Fulbright, and in the House, 
by Representative Morgan . 
Both houses heard top Adminis-
'tration officials , including 
Secretary McNamara, testify 
in behalf of the pending reso-
lutions . 
The additional forces deploy-
ments, particularly air fo'rces, 
begin to move to the theatre . 
The Tonkin Gulf resolution 
Has passed in both houses by 
near unanimous vote. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
9 Aug 1964 
10 Aug 1964 
11 Aug 1964 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMEJIJ'I' 
Khanh proclaims himself 
President 
State message 136, 
Rusk to Vientiane 
and others 
Embassy Saigon message 
363, Taylor to Rusk 
U. S. message to Hanoi 
t hrough Canadian ICC 
r epresentative 
William Bundy memo to 
SecDef, "Next Courses 
of Action in Southeast 
Asia 
,4 
DESCRIPI'ION 
Declaring a state of emergency, 
General Khan~ proclai med him-
sel f Presi dent of South Viet-
nam a!,d claims virtual dicta-
t or ial po"Ters . 
Concern over not pr ovoking a 
communi st military escalation 
in ~os , particularly in view 
of the Tonkin Gul f r eprisals , 
prompted State to defer tempo-
rarily approval of air and 
ground initiatives i n the 
Laotian panhandle . 
Taylor opposes a 14-nation 
Geneva Conference as likel y 
to undermine the little stabil ity 
the fragile GVN still has . 
He fUrther states that the 
reprisa,ls , while effective in 
the short run, do not deal with 
the continuing problem of DRV 
infiltration Ivhich must be 
confronted . 
He fel t there 
was need for follow-up action 
to demonstrate to the DRV that 
the rules of the ga~e had 
changed . 
Through the Canadian representa-
tive on the ICC, the U. S. com-
municated its uncertainty about 
DRV motives in the Aug 4 Tonkin 
Gul f raids , that additional 
air power deployed to SEA was 
precautionary, that U. S. offi-
,cial and public pa,tience "las 
i<Tearing thin, that the Congres -
sional resolution demonstrated 
U. S. determination in SEA, 
and that if the DRV pursued its 
prese'1t course , it could expect 
to suffer the consequences . 
Assistant Secretary of State 
Bundy felt that only a continu-
ous combination of military 
pressure and communication 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
14 Aug 1961r 
15 Aug 1964 
16 Aug 1964 
17 Aug 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
CJCS memo to SecDef, 
"Next Courses of Action 
in Southeast Asia" 
State message 439 
to Vientiane, Saigon, 
CINCPAC, "Southeast Asia, 
August 1964" 
JCS message 7947 to 
CINCPAC , "Rules of 
Engagement" 
COMUSMACV message to 
CINCPAC, "Cross-
Border Operations" 
CINCPAC message to JCS, 
"Next Courses of Action 
in Southeast Asian 
DESCRIPTION 
would convince Hanoi t~at they 
were facing a determined foe ' 
and that they should get out 
of S01..lth Vietnam and Laos . 
Positive assessment of the 
i mpact of the reprisal actions 
"ras given and a continuation 
of strikes against the Nor th 
was r ecommended . 
In opposing both a new 14-
nation Geneva Conference on 
Southeast Asia, and U. S. air 
operations against the North, 
State stressed the shakiness 
of the GVN and the need to 
shore i t up internally before 
any such actions "rere started . 
For planning purposes , the 
message suggested that Ambassa-
dor Taylor ' s suggested date 
of J anue,ry 1, 1965 , be used 
for any sustained U. S. air 
campaign against the North . 
U.S . forces wer e authorized 
to attack any vessel s or air-
craft that attack or give 
positive i ndication of intent 
t o attack, and to pursue such 
attackers into territorial 
waters or air space of all 
Southeast Asian countries, 
including North Vietnam . 
MACV requested authority to 
begin the Phase I of the covert 
cross -border operations into 
Laos and North Vietnam. 
The positive impact of the 
repri8al s on South Vietnamese 
mor ale i s noted, and a strong 
argument made for continui ng 
actions against the North to 
make clear to Hanoi and Peking 
the cost of their aggression . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
17 
DATE 
k8 Aug 1964 
21 Aug 1964 
26 Aug 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Embassy Saigon message 
465 
Henry ROIV'en memo to 
JCS, et al, liThe 
RostowThesis" 
JCSM-746-64 
6 
DESCRIPTION 
The momentu~ of the Aug 5 
raids must not be lost or the 
benefits of the initial attacks 
will disappear. 
Taylor reiterates his belief 
that the reprisals must be 
follovTed up with other actions 
against the North . 
Initially presented in Dec 1963 , 
the IIRostolV' Thesisll was recir-
culated within the Administra-
tion in mid-August. 
Its funda-
mental argu.rnent was that military 
pressure against the external 
sources of an insurgency vTould 
bring the aggressor to an appre -
ciation of the costs of his 
interference and he would reduce 
or eliminate his support for 
the insurgents. 
The exercise 
vTaS primarily psychological, 
not necessarily strategic . 
The measures should greatly 
increase his uncertainty about 
the consequences of continued 
support of the insurgency . 
Rowen's critique raised serious 
questions about the general 
validity of the thesis , point-
ing out the requirement for solid 
public and political support 
for such actions, and doubting 
that any\'There but in Southeast 
Asia U. S. interests were so 
critic8,lly at stake. 
Even in 
that area, it doubted the effec-
tiveness of the proposal . 
In response to State's Aug 14 
analysis, the JCS proposed a 
continuous and escalating air 
campaign against the North 
designed to both the physical 
resources and the psychological 
"lV'ill to support the insurgency 
in the South . It called for 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ig 
DA':eE 
27 Aug 1964 
31 Aug 1964 
3 Sep 1964 
7 Sep 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUIvIEI'I.l'I' 
Three Laotian Princes 
meet 
CINCPAC message to JCS, 
IIImmediate Actions to 
be taken in South 
Vietnamll 
McNaughton paper, IIPlan 
of Action for South 
Vietnamll 
Khanh reverts to 
Premiership 
JCS Talking Paper for 
CJCS, IINext Courses of 
Action for RVN" 
White House strategy 
meeting; decisions in 
William Bundy memo to 
SecDef, et al, II Courses 
of Action-for South 
Vietnam, " 8 Sep 1964 
7 
DESCRIPI'ION 
deliberate attempts to provoke 
the DRV into actions which 
could then be ans\·rered by 
a systematic air campaign. 
The three Laotian Princes 
met in Paris as a result of 
the British initiative to 
begin discussions on the cur-
rent crisis. 
CINCPAC reiterates the request 
for approval of covert cross-
border operati ons . 
In anticipation of the 7 Septem-
ber strategy meeting, McNaughton 
prepared a paper calling for 
actions that would provoke 
a DRV response that could 
be used as grounds for a U.S. 
escale.tion. 
His bid for dictatorial power 
having been rebuffed by the 
Army with popular support, 
Khanh reverted to his former 
tital of Premier 'I·rith greatly 
reduced pOl·rer . 
Minll is to 
playa larger role. 
The JCS repeated its recommenda-
tions of 26 Aug and detailed 
it with a list of 94 targets 
for air strikes . 
With A.mbassador Taylor returned 
from Saigon, a full dress strategy 
revie'lO[ of actions against the 
North is held at the vfuite House . 
The Pentagon spokesmen, both 
milite.ry and civilian, favored 
immediate initiation of an 
escalatory air campaign against 
the North . 
But this was rejected 
on the grounds that the GVN 
W8.S too io[e~k to sustain the 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
· Ct 
I / 
. 
. 
DATE 
10 Sep 1964 
11 Sep 1964 
12 Sep 1964 
18 Sep 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
NSAM 314 
Saigon meeting on 
cross-border opera-
tions 
DESOTO patrols 
resumed 
3rd Tonkin Gulf 
incident 
.8 
DESCRIPTION 
expected intensification of 
the war in the South it would 
evoke . 
This was the view of 
CIA, State and the White House. 
But a decision vias made to 
reSQme the DESOTO patrols, 
the covert GVN coastal opera-
tions against the North, and 
to authorize limited cross-
border operations into Laos 
when Souvap~a approved . It 
was further agreed that we 
would respond to any future 
DRV attacks on U.S. emits on 
a tit- for -tat basis . 
These 
latter measures were to bolster 
GVN morale . 
Formal approval of the 7 Septem-
ber decision was given in 
NSAM 314. 
At a Saigon meeting of representa-
tives of the U. S. missions in 
Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam, 
it was agreed that the air 
operations in Southern Laos 
would be carried out by RLAF 
aircraft for the present . 
As 
to ground operations , while 
their desirability was recog-
nized, they ,fere disapproved 
because of the flagrant viola-
tion of the Geneva Accords they 
would constitute . 
This objection 
by Vienticme WB.S subsequently 
r emoved and company-size opera-
tions up to 20 kilometers into 
Laos were approved. 
The destroyers USS MORTON 
and 
USS EDi'JARDS re sumed the DESOTO 
patro:_s off North Vietnam. 
On the night of the 18th, the 
third incident in the DESOTO 
patrols occurred . 
The two 
destroyers fired on radar identi-
fied attackers and apparently 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
30 Sep 1964 
1 Oct 1964 
4 Oct 1964 
6 Oct 196h 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUNENT 
CJCS memo to SecDef, 
"c ross-Border Opera-
tions" 
SJ:ITE 53-2-6h 
Cove:rt GVN coastal 
operations against 
DRV again authorized 
Joint State/Defense 
message 313 to 
Vientiane 
9 
DESCRIPTION 
scored a nQmber of hits . 
No 
return fire "IaS received from 
. the "attackers ." later bn the 
18th the President suspended 
the DESOTO patrols vrhich were 
not to be resQmed until Febru-
ary 1965 . 
The CJCS endorsed the proposals 
of the mission representatives 
and r equested i nLmediate authority 
to implement air operations 
in the Laotian panhandle ,vi th 
RLAF T-28s and U. S. aircraft 
for suppressive fire and attack-
i ng heavily defended targets. 
Authori ty for G'/H ground intelli-
gence acquisition patrols i n the 
laotian corridor "las also sought . 
The deterioration of GVN morale 
and effectiveness continued 
unabated and this intelligence 
estimate did not think that the 
hoped for civilian government 
"lOuld be able to reverse it . 
The VC ,vere not , hOi-lever, ex-
pected to make an overt military 
effort to capttITe the govern-
ment .. 
The P-.cesident authorized r ea.cti-
vation of the covert coastal 
strikes by the GVN against the 
DRV, under very tight controls 
'vi th each action to be cleared 
in advance by OSD, State and 
the "\Ilhite House . 
The Embassy is authorized to 
urge the laotian Govern~ent 
to begin T-28 strikes as soon 
as possible against a 22-target 
list .. rhich excluded the Mu Gia 
pass . 
Some of the targets 
,vere designed for U. S. YAJllKEE 
TEAM strikes . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
)J 
DATE 
9 Oct 1964 
13 Oct 1964 
14- Oct 1964 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVEiIJT OR 
DOCT.J};~r-TT 
SNIE 10-3-64 
Embassy Saigon 
message 1068, 
Taylor to Rusk 
Embassy Vientiane 
message 609, Unger 
to Rusk and McNamara 
Washington approves 
only combat air 
patrols 
RLAF makes intial U.S . 
supported attacks 
10 
DESCRIPI'ION 
In the evaluation of the likely 
North Vietnamese reactions to 
the actions approved in the 
Septem~)er 7 meeting, CIA con-
cluded that these woul d probably 
be limited to defensive and 
. propaganda measures with possi-
bly some scaling do,m of opera-
tions i n the South . 
China 
w'as not expected to enter the 
war as a r esult of even a 
systematic U. S. air campaign 
against the North . 
Taylor reported that the ARVN 
would be unable to conduct 
ground operations in the Laotian 
corridor in the foreseeable 
future and therefore U.S. air 
operations are urged . 
At a 
minimLUn, combat air patrols 
supporting RLAF strike missions 
were re'luested. 
U. S. air strikes against four 
defended targets are re'luested 
to accompany RLA_F T- 28 strikes 
in the northern panhandle . 
Washington, responding to Unger ' s 
r e'luest, authorized only U.S . 
combat air patrols in support 
of the RLAF' operations , not the 
U.S. strikes . 
U. S. air strikes 
against conmunist LOCs in the 
pa~handle are not authorized 
until much later. 
The RL~F, with U.S. aircraft 
in combat air patrol support, 
make the first strikes against 
the C0Il1 .. 111unist LOCs in the pan-
handIt . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
PROLOGUE: 
ACTIONS AND PROGRAMS UNDERWAY 
Several forms of pressure were already being applied against 
North Vietnam by July of 1964. 
Moreover) contingency plans for 
other forms - - should political and military circumstances warrant 
a' decision to use them - - were continually being adjusted and modi-
fied as the situation in Southeast Asia developed . 
The best known of these pressures was being applied in Laos . 
Since 21 May) U. S. aircraft had flmTn Imr-level r econnaissance missions 
over communist- occupied areas. 1/ 
In early June Premier Souvanna 
Phouma both gave and reaffirmed- his pel~ission for armed escort of 
these missions) which included the right to retaliate against hostile 
fire from the ground . 2/ 
This effort \-las supplemented at the end 
of the month i-Then the United States decided to conduct transport and 
night reconnaissance operations and furnish additional '1'-28 aircraft 
and munitions to support a Royal Laotian counteroffensive near Muong 
Soui. 
This decision came in response to Souvanna ' s request) in which 
he equated the protection of Muong Soui i-Tith the survival of the Laotian 
neutralist army. 3/ 
Air strikes conducted by the Royal. Lao Air Force) 
with T- 28s obtained from the United States) ,vere later credited with 
playing a major role in the success of the RLG's operations . 
Other actions obviously designed to forestall cowmunist aggressive 
intentions i-Tere taken in different parts of Southeast Asia. 
In June) 
follmTing the Honolulu strategy conference) state and Defense Depart-
ment sources made repeated l eaks to the press affirming U.S . intentions 
to support its allies and uphold its treaty commitments in Southeast 
Asia . J::.../ 
U.S. contingency ground-force stockages in Thailand i-Tere 
augmented and publicly acknoi-Tledged . 5/ 
Revelations i-Tere made that 
USAF aircraft '\{ere operating out of a -nei-Tly constructed air base at 
Da Nang . 
Moreover) the base was characterized as part of a network 
of ne'·T air bases and operational facilities being developed in South 
Vietnam and Thailand . 6/ 
On 10 July) the Da Nang base ,vas the site 
of a well-publicized Air Force Day display of allied airpower) including 
aircraft from a B-57 i-ring recently acknmdedged to have been permanently 
deployed to the Philj.ppines from Japan . 1/ 
tess knovn \-lere parallel actions taken within the Government . 
U.S. resolve to resist aggression in Southeast Asia was communicated 
directly to North Vietnam by the ne'\vly appointed Canadian member of 
the International ControJ. Commission) Blair Seaborn . 
Stressj.ng that 
U.S. ambit j.ons were limited and its intentions I'Tere 'tessentially peace-
ful) It Seaborn told Pham Van Dong that the patience of the U.S . Govern-
ment I{as not limitless . 
He explained that the United States was 
fully aware of the degreee to IoThich Hanoi controlled the Viet 
TOP SECliEJ' - Ser,sitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Cong i nsurgency and the Pathet Lao and might be obliged to carry 
the .rar to the North if DRV-assisted pressures against South Vi etnam 
continued . 
He further cautioned that U. S. stakes in resisting a 
North Vietnamese victory were high) since the United States saw the 
conflict in SOLltheast Asia as part of a gene:voal confrontation with 
guerrilla subversion in other parts of the .rorld) and that "in the 
event of escalation the greatest devastation .rould of course result 
for the DRVN itself." F)/ 
Also ll..l1derway were efforts directed tmrard educating the American 
public regarding our national interests in Southeast Asia and the 
extent of the U.S . commitment there . 
In reporting to the President) 
Administration officials who participated in the Honolulu Conference 
stressed the need for a domestic information effort to "get at the 
basic doubts" of the importance of the U.S. stake in Southeast Asia . 
The program was to be focused both on key members of the Congress and 
on the public . 9/ 
Thereafter) .rork was begun under State Department 
guidance to assemble information in ans.rer to ' some of the prevalent 
public questions on the U.S. involvement . 
Of special concern was a 
r ecent Ga11up poll sho,ving only 31 percent of the public to have some 
interest in our Southeast Asian policies . 
Administration officials 
viewed this group as consisting prnaarily of either those desiring our 
.rithdrawal or those urging our striking at North Vietnam . 
A general 
program was proposed with the aVOlved aims of eroding public support for 
these polar positions and solidifying a large "center " behind the thrust 
of current Administration policies . 
These aims Here to be accomplished 
by directing public comment into discussions of the precise alternatives 
available to the United States) greater exposure to \·rhich it Has believed 
Hould alienate both "haHk" and "dove " supporters . 10/ 
Less than a 
week after this proposal .ras submitted) the I'lhi te B-Ouse published a 
NSAM) naming its proponent ) Robert Manning) as coordinator of all public 
information activities for Southeast Asia and directing all agencies to 
cooperate in furthering the Administration ' s information objectives . 11/ 
One of the principal foci of the subsequent infonnation program was --
the compilation of 'a public pamphlet of questions raised by critics of 
Administration policy together Hith ansvers furnished and coordinated by 
several i nterested Government agencies ~ 
Unknown to more than a limited number of Government officials were 
a variety of covert military or quasi-military operations being con-
ducted at the expense of North Vietnam . 
U.S. naval forces had undertaken 
i nterraittent patrol operations in the Gulf of Tonkin designed to acquire 
visual) e1ectronic and. photographic intelligence on infiltration activi-
ties and c03st~1 navigation from North Vietpgm to the South . 
To carry 
out these missions) destroyers ",ere assigned to tracks betHeen fbced 
points and according to stipulated schedules . 
Designated DE SOTO Patrols) 
the first such operation of 19611. occurred during the period 28 February-
10 March . 
On this patrol the U.S.S. Craig was authorized to approach 
to vithin 4 n .m. of the North Vietnamese mainland) 15 D.m. of the Chinese 
mainland and 12 n.m . of Chinese-he1d Jslands . 
No j.ncidents "fere reported 
2 
TOP SECR~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
as resulting from thi s action. 
The next DE SOTO Patrol did not occur vBtil 
31 July) on which the U.S.S. Maddox was restricted to a track not ~loser 
than 8 n.m. off the North Vietnamese ma inland . 12/ Its primary mission) 
assigned on 17 July) was "to determine DRV coastal activity along the 
full extent o~n the patrol track. " Other specific intelligence r equire-
ments were assigned as follows: 
"( a ) location and identification of all radar transmitters) 
and estimate of range capabilities; (b ) navigational and hydro 
i nformation along the routes traversed and particular naviga-
tional lights characteristics) landmarks) buoys) currents and 
tidal inforraat ion) river mouths and channel accessibility) (c ) 
monitoring a junk force ,{ith density of surface traffic pattern) 
(d ) sampling electronic environment radars and navigation aids) 
(e ) photography of opportunities in support of above .... " 
Separat e coastal patrol operations were being conducted by South 
Vietnamese naval forces. 
These were designed to uncover and interdict 
efforts to smuggle personnel and supplies into the South in support of 
the VC insurgency . 
This operation had first been organized with U. S. 
aSSistance in December 1961; to support it a fleet of motorized junks 
was built; partially financed with U.S. military assistance funds . 
During 1964 these vessels operated almost continually in attempts to 
intercept communist seaborne logistical operations . 
As Secretary 
McNamara told Senate committees: 
"In the first seven months of this year /19647; they 
have searched 149;000 junks ; some 570;000 people~ This is 
a tremendous operation endeavoring to close the seacoasts 
of Over 900 miles . 
In the nrocess of that action) as the 
j unk patrol has increased i~ strength they LSi£7 have moved 
farther and farther north endeavor.ing to find the source of 
the infiltrat ion ." 14/ 
In addition to these ackno\-Tledged activities; the GVN .Tas also 
conducting a number of operations against North Vietnam to which it 
did not publicly admit . 
Covert operations ,{ere carried out by South 
Vietnamese or hired personnel and supported by U.S. training and logis-
tical efforts . 
Outlined .rithin OPLAN 3~A; t hese operations had been 
unden18Y theoretically since February but had experienced what the JCS 
called a "slow begiIming. ir 
Despite an ultimate objective of helping 
"convince the North Vietnamese l eadership that it is in i ts mm self-
interest to d~sist from its aggressive policies)" feyT operat i ons designed 
to harass the enemy ,·rere carried out succes~fully during the Februal'y-May 
period. 
Nevertheless) citing DRV reactions tending "to substantiate the 
premise that Hanoi is expending substantial r esources in defensive measures-) " 
the JCS concluded that the potential of the OPLAN 34A program r emai ned 
high and urged i ts continuation through Phase II (JQne-September) . 15/ 
Operations i ncluding air-infiltration of sabotage teams) underl{8ter demo-
lition) and seizures of cOrtlI'lunist junks were approved for the period.) and 
a fe,I ,{ere carried by specialJy trained GVN forces during JQne and Jv~y . 16/ 
." 
-
. 3 
TOP SECRET -
S~ns it ive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In the process of combined GVlIT-U.S. planning) but not yet 
approved for execution) ",ere cross -border operations against VC- North 
Vietnamese logistical routes in Laos . 
This planning provided for both 
air attacks by the VNAF and "ground operations up to battalion size " i n 
the laotian Panhandle . 
Preparations for such actions had been approved 
i n principle since March but since then l ittle further 
i nterest had been 
sho"'n in them . 
Toward the end of July) the air force portion .Tas exami ned 
seriously by Administration officials as a means not only to damage the 
Communist logistical effort but also "primarily for reasons of morale i n 
South Vietnam and to divert GVN attention from 187 proposal to strike 
North Vietnam . II 17/ 
- -
In addition to both the open and covert operations already under-
",ay) a number of other actions intended to bring pressure against North 
Vietnam had been recommended to the IVhite House . 
Receiving considerabl e 
attention among Administration officials during May and June vTaS a pro-
posed request for a Congressional Resolution, reaffirming support by the 
legislators for Presidential action to resist Commlmist advances in 
Southeast Asia during an election year /Tab A7. In some respects paral-
l eling this domestic initiative) the President was urged to present to the 
United Nations the detailed case assembled by the Government supporting 
the charges of DRV aggression against South Vietnam and Laos . 
He vlaS 
also urged to authorize pertodic deployments of additional forc es tOvTard 
Southeast Asia as a means of demonstrating U.S. resolve to undertake 
vThatever measures ",ere required to resist aggression in that region . 
Moreover)' in OPLAN 37-64) there ",as fully developed a listing of forces to 
be deployed as a deterrent to corrununist escalati on in reaction to U. S. /GVN 
actj_ons against North Vietnam. 
Finally) it was recommended that the 
President make tlie decision to use liS elected and carefully graduated mili-
tary force against North Vietnam II if necessary to improve non-Communist 
prospects in South Vietnmn and Laos . 18/ 
The source docwnents. available to this ",riter are not clear on the 
exact decisions made in response to each of these recommendations) or 
i ndeed on the precise form or context in vrhich the r econunendations ,,,ere 
presented . 
It i s evident that the proposal to seek a Congressional 
Resolution "'as not favorably received, but as subsequent events indi cate 
neither ",as it rejected out- of- hand . 
It proved very useful in largely the 
same language just tvlO months later . 
Less certain are the decisions made 
about the other proposals; 
Certainly they vTere not approved for immedi-
ate implementation . 
Ho",ever) it is not clear whether they "'ere (1) f l atly 
disapproved) (2 ) merely postponed) or ( 3) approved in principle) subject 
to gradual implementation . 
At the Honolulu Conference: "There many of the 
proposed actions ",ere discussed with U.S. officials from the theatre) man:,r 
practical considerations Her e aired "Thich shov!ed that delayed implementa-
tion ,VGuld be a reasonable course of action . 19/ 
But such factors vTould 
have provided equally valid r easons for either-deciding against the pro-
posals or for merely deferring a decision until a later) more appropriate 
time . 
The most significant point, for an understanding of the events and 
decisions of the second half of 1964, is that these options remained lion 
tho shelf " for possible implel1J.entation should favorable circumstances 
arise . 
.4 
TOP SECRET - SenSitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
II 
THE TO~KIN GULF CRISIS 
Several o~ the pressuring measures recommended to the White House 
i n Mayor June were implemented in conjunction with or in the immediate 
aftermath of naval action in the Tonkin Gulf . 
It is this fact and the 
rapidity with which these measures were taken that has l ed critics to 
doubt some aspects of the public account of the Tonkin incidents . 
It is 
also this fact) together "Tith later Administratiop assessments of the 
Tonkin Gulf experience) that give the incidents greater significance 
than the particular events seemed at first to "rarrant . 
THE FIRST INCIDENT 
What happened in the Gulf? As noted earlier) U.S.S. MADDOX com-
menced the second DE SOTO Patrol on 31 July. 'On the prior night South 
Vietnamese coastal patrol forces made a midnight attack) including an 
amphibious "commando" raid) on Hon Me and Hon Nieu Islands ) about 19
0 N. 
latitude . 
At the time of this attack) U.S.S. MADDOX "\vas 120-130 miles 
a'tray just heading into "raters off North Vietnam. 
On 2 August) having 
reached the northernmost point on its patrol track and having headed 
South) the destroyer was intercepted by three North Vietnamese patrol 
boats . 
Apparently) these boats and a fleet of junks had moved into the 
area near the island to search for the attacking force and had mistaken 
Maddox for a South Vietnamese escort vessel . 
(Approximately eleven hours 
earlier) while on a northerly heading) Maddox had altered course to avoid 
the junk concentration ShOlVD on her radar; about six hours after that - -
now headed South . __ Maddox had altered her course to the southeast to 
avoid the ju...1J.ks a second time. ) 
When the PT boats began their high-speed 
run at her) at a distanc e of approximately 10 miles) the destroyer "as 
28 miles from the coast and heading farther into international waters . 
'I'vTO of the boats closed to within 5)000 yards) launching one torpedo each . 
As they approached) Maddox fired on the boats i-Tith her 5- inch batteries 
and altered course to avoid the torpedoes ) which i-Tere observed passing 
the starboard side at a distance of 100 to 200 yards . 
The third boat 
moved up abeam of the destroyer and took a direct 5- inch hit ; it managed 
to launch a torpedo vThich failed to run. 
All three PT boats fired 50-
caliber machine glUJ.S at Maddox as they made their firing ru...ns ) and a bullet 
fra gment was recovered from the destroyer ' s superstructure . 
The attacks 
occurred in mid-afternoon) and photographs were taken of the torpedo boats 
as they attacked . 20/ 
Upon first report of the PT boats ' apparently hostile intent ) four 
F-:8E aircraft ,'Tere launched from the aircraft carrier Ticonderoga) many 
miles to the South) ,'Tith instructions to provide air cover but not to 
fire unless they or Maddox were fired upon. 
As Maddox continued Ln a 
southerly direction) Ticonderoga ' s aircraft attacked the ti-TO boats that 
had initiated the action~th were damaged with Zuni rockets and 20mm 
gunfire. 
The third boat) struck by the destroyer's 5-inch) 'Has already 
5 
TOP SECRE,"T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1'OP SECREf - Sensitive 
dead i n the water . 
After about eight minutes) the a i rcraft broke off 
t hei r attacks . 
In the meantime) Maddox had been directed by the 7th 
Fleet Commander to retire from the area to avoid hostil e fire . 
Following 
their attacks on the PT 1s ) the aircraft joined Maddox and escorted her back 
toward South Vietnamese waters where she joined a second destroyer) 
C. Turner Joy . 
The two ships continued to patrol in international waters . 
Approximately two hours after the action) in early evening) reconnaissance 
aircraft from Ticonderoga located the damaged PT 1s and obtained tWO/hoto-
graphs . 
The third boat was last seen burning and presumed sunk . 21 
On 3 August a note of protest was dispatched to the Hanoi Government ) 
r eportedly through the International Control Commission for Indo- China. 
Directed by the PreSident) the note stressed the unprovoked nature of the 
North Vietnamese attack and closed with the following warning: 
liThe U. S. Government expects that the authorit i es of the 
regime in North Vietnam will be under no misapprehens i on as to 
the grave consequences Hhich would inevitably result from any 
further unprovoked offensive military action against U. S. forces .
1I 
On that same day) measures were taken to increase the security of the 
DE SOTO Patrol) the approved schedule of which still had two days to run. 
At 1325 hours (Washington time ) the JCS approved a CINCPAC request to 
resume the patrol at a distance of 11 n .m. from the North Vietnamese 
coast . 22/ 
Later in the day) President Johnson announced that he had 
approved doubling the patroll ing force and authorized active defensive 
measures on the part of both the destroyers and their escorting aircraft . 
His press statement included the following: 
I have instructed the Navy : 
1. 
To continue the patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin off the 
coast of North Vietnam . 
2 . 
To double the force by adding an additional destroyer to 
t he one already on patrol . 
3· 
To provide a combat air patrol over the destroyers) and 
4. 
To issue orders to the commanders of the combat aircraft 
and the two destroyers j (a ) to attack any forc e which attacks them 
in international waters) and (b ) to attack Hith the objective not 
only of drivj.ng off the force but of destroying it . 23/ 
THE SECo.ND INCmENT 
Late the following evening the destroyers) Maddox and C. Turner Joy) 
"\{ere involved i n a second encounter "lith hostile patrol boats . 
Like the 
first incident) this occurred follovling a South Vietnamese attack on North 
6 
TOP SECRET - Sens i tive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Vietnamese coastal targets -- thi s time the Rhon River estuary and 
the Vinh Sonh radar installation, which were bombarded on the night 
of 3 August . 
The more controversial of the two, this incident occUrred 
under cover of darkness and seems to have been both t riggered and des-
cribed largel;,' by radar and sonar images . 
.After the act i on had been 
j oi ned, hOlvever) both visual sightings and intercepted North Vietnamese 
cornlllunications confirmed that an attack by hostile patrol craft Ivas i n 
progress . 24/ 
At 1940 hours, 4 August 1964 (Tonkin Gulf time ), while "proceeding 
S.E. at best speed," Task Group 72 .1 (Maddox and Turner Joy ) radioed 
"RCVD INFO indj.cating attack by PGM p-4 imminent ." Evidently this was 
based on an intercepted communication, later i dentified as 1Ian i ntelli-
gence source,lI indicating that 1INorth Vietnamese naval forces had been 
ordered to attack the patrol ." At the time, radar contacts evaluated 
as IIprobable torpedo boats " "\-rere observed about 36 miles to the northeast . 
Accordingly, the Task Group Commander altered course and increased speed 
to avoid what he evaluated as a trap . 
At approximately 2035 hours, "\-'hile 
west of Hainan Island, the destroyers reported radar sightings of three 
unidentified aircraft and tl-TO unidentified vessels in the patrol area . 
On receiving the r eport, Ticonderoga immediately launched F-8s and A- 4Ds 
to provide a combat air patrol over the destroyers . 
Within minutes, the 
unidentified aircraft disappeared from the radar screen, while the vessels 
maintained a distance of about 27 miles . 
Actually, surface contacts on 
a parallel course had been shadOlving the destroyers wi th radar for more 
than three hours . 
ECM contacts maintained by the C. Turner Joy indicated 
that the radar was that carried aboard DRV patrol boats . 25/ 
New unident;i.fied surface contacts 13 miles distant ,{ere report ed 
at 2134 hours . 
These vessels were closing at approximately 30 knots on 
t he beam and were evaluated as IIhostile" . 
Six minutes later (2140 ) 
Maddox opened fire , and at 1242, by ,vhich time two of the new contacts 
had closed to a distance of 11 miles, aircraft from Ticonderoga ' s CAP 
began their attacks . 
Just before this, one of the PT boats launched 
a torpedo, which was later reported as seen passing about 300 feet off 
the port beam) from aft to fOTITard) of the C. Turner Joy . 
A searchlight 
beam "\Vas observed to swing in an arc tm-Tard the C. Turner Joy by all of 
the destroyer ' s signal bridge personnel . 
It was extinguished before i t 
illu.minated the ship, preswnably upon detection of the approachj.ng air-
craft . 
Aboard the Maddox, Marine gunners saw 'ilhat were believed to be 
cockpit lights of one or more small boats pass up the port side of the 
ship and dm-rn the other . 
After approximately an hour ' s action, the 
destroyers reported hTO enemy boats sunk and no damage or casualties 
suffered . 26/' 
In the meantime, tvo patrol craft from the initial surface contact 
had closed to join the action, and the engagement was described for higher 
headquarters -- largely on the basis of the destroyers ' radar and sonar 
indications and on radio intercept information . 
In successive messages to 
CINCPACFLT, beginning about 2150 hours ) the Commander of Task Group 72 .1 
radioed that he I·Tas "under continu.ous torpedo attack ll -- that at least 
six and later ten torpedoes had been successfully evaded . 
Eventually) 
'7 
I 
TOP SgCRE L' .. Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the count reached 22 torpedoes) a total which caused the Coramanding 
Officer) once the engagement had ended) to question the validity of 
his report and communicate these doubts to his superiors : 
II Rev:i e".J of action makes many recoroed contacts and 
t orpedoes fired appear doubtful . 
Freak weather effects and 
overeager sonarman may have accounted for many reports . II 
In addition to sonar readings) hmrever) the Task Group had also reported 
i ntercepting co~mQDications from North Vietnamese naval craft indicating 
that they were involved in an attack on U.S. (llenemyll ) ships and that 
they had IIsacrificedll t"ro vessels i n the engagement . 27/ 
THE RESPONSE IN WASHINGTON 
Sometime prior to the r eported termination of the engagement) at 
0030 hours) 5 August (Tonkin Gulf time)) lIalert orders ll to prepare for 
possible reprisal raids were sent out by naval authorities to Ticonderoga 
and t o a second aircraft carrier) Constellation) '\{hich started heading 
South from Hong Kong late on 3 August . 
Such raids "rere actually ordered 
and carried out later in the day . 
IIDefense officials disclosed /J-n public 
testimony) 9 January 19687 that) when the first word was received of the 
second attack ' immediate- consideration "Tas given to r etaliation. ,II 
That 
apparently began shortly after 0920 hours (Washington time )) vrhen the 
task group message that a North Vietnamese naval attack "Tas imminent was 
first relayed to Washington . 
From this time on) amid a sequence of mes -
sages describing the attack) Secretary McNamara held "a series of meetings 
with !fii~7 chief civilian and military advisersll concerning the engage-
ment and possibl~ U.S. retaliatory actions. 
As he testified before the 
Fulbright Committee : 
IIWe identified and refined various options for a response to 
the attack) to be presented to the President . 
Among these options 
was the air strike against the attacking boats and their associated 
bases) which option was eventually selected . 
As the options ,{ere 
i dentified preliminary messages ,{ere sent to appropriate operational 
commanders alerting them to the several possibilities so that initial 
planning steps cou~d be undertaken . II 28/ 
. At 1230) the President met '\{ith the National Security Council. 
Having just come from a brief meeting with the J CS) attended also by 
Secretary Rusk and McGeorge Bl.mdy) Secretary McNamara briefed the NSC 
on the reported details of the attack and the possibilities for reprisal. 
Shortly thereafter (presumably during a working lunch '\{ith the President) 
Secretary Rusk and Bundy) and after receiving by telephone the advice of 
the JCS) McNamara and the others recommended specific reprisal actions . 
It '\{as at this pOint that the President approved lIa response consisting 
of an air strike on the PT and STrlATOH boat bases and their associated 
facilities . II 29/ 
8 
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Returning from this session shortly after 1500) Secretary McNamara) 
along vrith Deputy Secretary Vance) joined with the JCS to r eviei-r all the 
evidence relating to the engagement . 
Included in this r eview was the 
communications intelligence information which the Secretary reported) 
containing North Vietnamese reports that (1) their vessels were engaging 
the destroyers) and (2) they had lost hro craft in the fight . 
In the 
meantime) hOi-rever) messages had been relayed to the Joint Staff indicating 
considerable confusion over the details of the attack . 
'1'he DE SO'1'O Patrol 
Conrrnander ' s message) expressing doubts about ea rlier evidence of a large-
scale torpedo attack) arrived sometime after 1330 hours . 
Considerably 
later (it was not sent to CINCPACFLT until 1447 EDT)) another message 
arrived to the effect that while details of the action were still confusing) 
the co~mander of Task Group 72 .1 was certa in that the ambush was genuine . 
He had interviewed the personnel who sighted the boat's cockpit lights 
passing near the Maddox) and he had obtained a report from the C. Turner 
Joy that two torpedoes were observed passing nearby. 
Accordingly) these 
reports were discussed by telephone with CINCPAC) and he was instructed 
by Secretary McNamara to make a careful check of the evidence and ascertain 
whether there vTaS any doubt concerning the occurrence of an attack . 
CINCPAC 
called the JCS at l east twice more) at 1723 and again at 1807 hours) to state 
that he Ilas convinced on the basis of "additional i nformation II that the 
attacks had taken place . 30/ 
At the time of the earlier call Secretary 
McNamara and the JCS werediscussing possible force deployments to foliow 
any reprisals . 
On the occasion of the first call) the Secretary was at 
the White House attending the day ' s second NSC meeting . 
Upon being informed 
of CINCPAC ' s call) he reports : 
"I spoke to the Director of the Joint Staff and asked him 
to make certain that the Commander in Chief) Pacific vTas vlilling 
to state that the attack had taken place) and therefore that he 
was free to release the Executive Order because earlier in the 
afternoon I had told him that under no circumstances would retali -
atory action take place until we were) to use my words) ' damned 
sure that the attacks had taken place. , " 31/ 
At the meeting of the Nat ional Security Council) proposals to deploy 
certa in increments of OPLAl'J 37-64 forces to the Western Pacific were dis-
cussed) and the order to retaliate against North Vietnamese patrol craft 
and t heir associated facilities was confirmed . 
Following this meeting) 
at 1845) t he President met >lith 16 Congressional leaders from both parties 
for a period of 89 minutes . 
Reportedly) he described the second incident 
in the Gulf) explained his decisions to order reprisals) and informed the 
l egisl ators of his intention to request a formal statement of Congressional 
support for trese decisions. 
On the morninp; follmring the meeting) The 
Washington Post carried a r eport that none of the Congressional leaders 
present at the meeting had raised objections to the course of action 
planned. 
Their only question) the report stated) "had to do with hm1 
Congress could sho1-7 its agreement and concern in the crisis. " 32/ 
9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In many ways the attacks on U.S. ships in the Tonkin Gulf provided 
the Administration vrith an opportunity to do a number of things that had 
been urged on it. Certai nly it offered a politically acc eptable way of 
exerting direct punitive pressure on North Vietnam . 
In South Vietnam, t he 
U. S. response served to satisfy for a time the grO\oTing desi re f or some 
action to carry the war to the North . 
Relative to the election campaign, 
i t provided a means of ellininating any doubts about President Johnson ' s 
decisiveness that may have been encouraged by his preferred candidate ' s 
image as the r estrained man of peace . 
The obvious convenience and the ways 
i n which it was exploited have been at the root of much of the suspi cion 
I-Ti th I-Thich critics of Administration policy have viel-Ted the incident . 
The documents available to this writer are not conclusive on this 
pOint, but the evidence indicates that the occurrence of a DRV pr ovocation 
at this time resu~ted from events over which the U.S. Government exerc i sed 
l i ttle control . 
It has been suggested that the incidents were related 
i n some I-ray to pressure coming from the GVN for U. S. action against North 
Vietnam . 
HOI-Tever , the patrol was authorized on or prior to 17 Jul y, and 
General Khanh ' s oft-cited "Go North" appeal wasn ' t made until 19 July . 
The first attack almost certainly \las a case of mistaken judgment on the 
part of the local Vietnamese commander . 
His probable association of U.S.S. 
Maddox ITith the South Vietnamese raiding force is indicated by the circum-
stances preceding the event, the brief duration and character of i t , and 
the long-del ayed (not until 5 August ) and rather subdued DRV public com-
ment . 
Moreover, there i s little reason to see anything more than coi nci-
dence in the close conjunction behTeen the GVIT ' s maritime operations against 
the North Vietnamese coast and the scheduling of the DE SOTO Patrol . 
The 
hTO operations I-Tere scheduled and monitored from different authorities 
and through separate channels of communication and command . 
Higher U.S. 
naval commands were informed of the operations against the hro islands 
by COMUSMACV) but the task group comJJ1.ander had no k....YlO\oTledge of where or 
Ivhen the specific operations had taken place . 
As Secretary McNamara 
told Senator Morse) in respons e to charges that U. S. naval forces were 
supporting the GVN operation) 
"Our shi ps had absolutely no knO\oTledge of it, were not 
connected Ivith it; i n no sense of the word can be considered 
to have backstopped the effort ." 
In addition) there Ivas no reason on the basis of earlier DE SOTO Patrol 
experience to even suspect that patrol activity might precipitate hostile 
action by North Vietnmn . 33/ 
Although the events of the second attack I-iere less clear- cut ) the 
. evidence does not support beliefs (which have been expressed ) that the 
incj.dent vas staged . 
On the contrary) the evidence l eads readily to 
other explanations) which'are at least equally as plausible . 
DRV motj.vations for the second attack are unclear) but several 
possibilities provide rational explanat ions for a deliberate DRV decision . 
Those given credence at the time - - t.hat the DRV or China l-ranted to 
10 
TOP SECRET _. Sensitive 
------
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
i ncrease pressures for an international conference or that the DRV 
was testing U.S. reactions to a contemplated genera~offensive 34/ 
have l ost some credibility. 
Subsequent events and DRV actions have 
appeared to lack any consistent relationship with such motives . 
Perhaps 
closer to the mark i s the narrow purpose of :prompt retaliat i on for an 
embarrassing and .Tell-publicized rebuff by a much-maligned enemy . 
Inex-
perienced in modern naval operations, DRV leaders may have believed that 
under cover of darkness it .Tould be possible to even the score or to pro-
vide at l east a psychological victory by severely damaging a U.S. ship . 
Unlike the first inCident, the DRV was ready (5 August ) with a propaganda 
blast denying its 0I.Jn provocation and claiming the destruction of U. S. 
aircraft . 
Still, regardless of motive, there i s little question but t hat 
the attack on the destroyers was deliberate . 
Havi ng followed the destroyers 
f or hours, their course was well knOlm to the North Vietnamese naval f orce, 
and its advance units were l aying ahead to make an ambushing beam attack 
fully 60 miles from shore . 
The reality of a North Vietnamese attack on 4 August has been corro-
borated by both visual and t echnical evidence . 
That i t may have been 
deliberately provoked by the United States is belied to a considerable 
degree by circumstanti al evidence . 
Operating r estrictions for the DE saro 
Patrol ivere made more stringent follovring the first attack . 
The 11 n .m., 
rather than 8 n.m., off-shore patrolling track indicates an intention to 
avoid -- not provoke - - further contact . 
On 4 February the rules of engage-
ment were modified to restrict "hot pursuit " by the U. S. shi ps to no 
closer than 11 n .m. from the North Vietnamese coast ; aircraft were to 
pursue no closer than 3 n .m. 35/ 
Given the first attack, t he President ' s 
augmentation of the patrol force .Tas a normal· precaution, particularly 
since both Ticonderoga and C. Turner J oy were already deployed in the 
inilllediate vicinity as supporting elements . 
Moreover, since the augmenta -
tion w'as coupled with a clear statement of intent to continue the patrols 
and a firm warning to the DRV that repetition vrould bring di re consequences, 
their addition to the patrol could be expected to serve more as a deterrent 
than a provocation . 
The often alleged "poised II condition of the U. S. repri sal forces was 
anything but extraordinary . 
U. S. S. Constellation .ras .Tell out of the 
immediate operating area as the patroll{8s resumed on 3 August . 
In fact , 
one r eason for delaying the launching of retaliatory air strikes (nearly 
1100 hours , 5 August -- Tonkin Gulf time) was to permit Constellati on to 
approach within reasonable range of the targets . 
Target lists from which to 
make appropriate selections were already available as a result of routine 
contingency planning accomplished i n June and July . 
In preparation for 
the resumed DE SOTO Patrol- of 3-5 August, the patrol track was moved farther 
north to make (!learer the separation behreen it and the 34-A operations . 36/ 
The "\orays in which the events of the second Tonkin Gulf incident came about' 
give little indication of a deliberate provocation to provide opportunity 
for reprisals . 
BROADENING THE 1MPACT 
There is no question, hovTever, that the second i nc ident "\oTas promptly 
exploited by the .Administration . 
The' event .ras seized upon as an opportunity 
11 
TOP SECR~' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
to take several measures that had been recomnlended earlier and which were 
now seen as useful means of turning an essentially unique and localized 
incident into an event .rith broader strategic impact. 
The extent to which 
the strategic utility of these actions was perceived during the two days 
between the iLcidents is not clear . 
Certail.ly the disposition of U.S .S. 
Constellation does not suggest a picture of intensive preparation for a 
planned series of new military and political pressures against North 
Vietnam . 
Moreover) there is no record in the usual sources of the series 
of staff meetings) task assignments and memoranda that typically accompany 
preparations for coordinated political and. military initiatives . 
What -
ever Ivas contemplated between 2 and 4 August) the deliberations imnlediately 
preceding the reprisal decision seem to have been largely ad hoc) both 
within DOD and among the President's prinCipal advisers . 
The most reasonable explanation for the actions which accompanied 
the r eprisals) and for the rapidity of their implementation) is the fact 
that each of them had been proposed and staffed in detail months before . 
These "on the shelf" options had been recommended unanimously by the 
prinCipal officials r esponsible for security matters in Southeast Asia . 
T~e fact that they were implemented in August indicates that the President 
dld not disapprove of them but rather that the domestic and international 
political environments had) probably been judged i nappropriate earlier in 
the summer . 
The measures apparently had been considered either too costly 
o~ too risky (perhaps politically or perhaps in terms of communist reactions)) 
glven the President's election strategy and his policy theme of "maximum 
effect with minimum escalat·ion ". 
The kind of circlJJnstances created by the 
Tonkin Gulf affair enabled them to be carried out at 10lver cost and with 
l ess risk. 
The promptness with Ivhich these actions were to be taken novr 
is perhaps as much a direct result of the President's well-known political 
astuteness and keen sense of timing as any other single factor . 
One of the first actions taken was to deploy additional U.S. mili-
tary forces to the Western Pacific . 
This was done i n part as a measure 
to deter any hostile responses by Hanoi or Peking to the reprisal raids . 
~t also enabled making a stronger signal of U.S . resolve to defend its 
lnterests t hroughout Southeast Asia as recon~ended at the end of May . 
. 
) 
Orders dlrecting the deployment of selected 37-64 forces and the alerting 
of others were dispatched from the Pentagon shortly after the President ' s 
meeting with Congressional leaders on the evening of 4 August . 
Shortly 
after midnight ) on 5 August, and again later in the day) Secretary McNamara 
announced the specific measures by which UoS. military capabilities around 
Southeast Asia were being augmented: 
"Fir:;t) an attack carrier group ha.., been transferred from 
the First Fleet on the Pacific coast to the Western Pacific . 
Secondly, interceptor and fighter bomber aircraft have been 
moved into South Vietnam. 
Thirdly) fighter bomber aircraft have 
been moved into Thailand. 
Fourthly) interceptor and fighter 
12 
TOP SECRET - SenSitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
bomber squadrons have been transferred from the United States 
into advance bases in the Pacific . 
Fifthly) an antisubmarine 
task force group has been moved into the South China Sea . 37/ 
It is Significant) relative to the broader purpose of the deploy-
ments) that fev of these additional units were removed from the Western 
~acific when the immediate crisis subsided . 
In late September the fourth 
attack aircraft carrier was authorized to resume its normal station in 
the Eastern Pacific as soon as the regularly assigned carrier compl et ed 
repairs. 
The other forces remained in the vicinity of their August deploy-
ment. 38/ 
Other actions taken by the Administration in the wake of Tonkin 
Gulf were intended to communicate to various audiences the depth and 
sincerity of the U.S. commitment . 
On the evening of 4 August) in con-
j unctj.on with his testing of Congressional opinion regarding reprisal 
action) President Johnson disclosed his intention to request a resolution 
i n support of U.S. Southeast Asian policy . 
This he did through a formal 
message to both houses on 5 August . 
Concurrently) identical draft 
resolutions) the language of .Thich had been prepared by executive agencies) 
were introduced in the Senate by J . William Fulbright (D.) Ark.) and in 
t he House by Thomas E. Morgan (D.) Pa; ) and co-sponsored by bi-partisan 
leadership . 39/ 
Discussed in committee on 6 August) in r esponse to 
testimony by~eading Administration officials) the resolution was passed 
the follOl-TiDj2. day -- by votes of 88 to 2 i n the Senate and 416 to 0 in 
the House 
LTab f7. 
Despite the nearly unanimous votes of support for the Resolution) 
Congressional opinions varied as to the policy implications and the 
meaning of such support . 
The central belief seemed to be that the 
occasion necessitated demonstrating the nation ' s unity and collective 
will in support of the President ' s action and affirming U.S. determinati on 
to oppose further aggression . 
However) beyond that theme) there was a 
considerable variety of opinion . 
For example) in the House) expressions 
of support varied from Congressman Laird ' s argument ) that while the 
retaliation in the Gulf was appropriate such act i ons still l eft a policy 
to be developed with respect to the land ,.,rar in Southeast Asia) to the 
more reticent viewpoint of Congressman Alger . 
The latter characterized 
his support as being primarily for purposes of shmving unity and expressed 
concern over the danger of being dragged into war by "other nations 
seeking our help ." Several spokesmen stressed that the Resolut ion did 
not constitute a declaration of >,rar) clid not abdicate Congressional 
responsj.bilit:" for determining national pol i.cy commitments) and di d not 
give the President carte blanche to involve the nation in a major Asian 
war . 40/ 
. 
. 
Similar express ions '{ere voiced in the senior chamber . 
For example) 
Senator Nelson sought assurances that the Resolution would not be exploited 
to cormnit the United States further in the direction of a large land Har 
13 
TOP SEC REI' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
i n Asia without an .expression of specific Congressional approval . 
In 
r esponse) Senator Fulbright stated that he did not believe that the Resolu-
tion changed in any ",-Tay the Administration I s concept of keeping the 
conflict i n Vietnam as Ijmited as possible . 
He identified the purposes 
of the Resolut::.on as being only (1 ) "to make it clear that the Congress 
approves the action taken by the President to meet the attack on U.S. 
fOTces •... " and (2 ) to declare SUppOTt fOT the r esolute policy enunc i ated 
b.y the President in order to pTevent further aggression) or to retaliate 
with suitable measures should such aggression take place ." 41/ 
However) 
in subsequent discussion it was made clear .that preventi ng or r etaliating 
against further aggression was interpreted Tather bToadly at the t jme : 
"(Mr . Cooper ) 
•.. are we now giving the President advance 
authority to take whatever action he may deem necessaTY res-
pecting South Vietnam and its defense) or with Tespect to the 
defense of any other cOuntTY i ncluded in the LSR4TQ7 treaty? 
"(Mr . Fulbright) 
I think that is cOTTect . 
"(Mr . Cooper ) 
Then) looking ahead) if the President 
decided that it vas necessary t o use such force as could lead 
into waT) we "'-Till give that authority by this resolution? 
"(Mr . Fulbright ) 
If a situation l ater 
should be ,vi thdrawn 
tion ." 42/ 
That is the way I ",-Tould i nterpret it . 
developed i n which ve thought the approval 
it 'could be vithdTavn by concurrent resolu-
The Congressional Resolution had several intended audiences . 
First ) 
i t was ajmed at the communist po",-Ters vho might not believe the President 
vould risk legislative debate over strong military actions in an election 
year . 
Second) it was intended to reassure our allies ) particularly in 
Asia) l-rho might doubt the ability of the President to rally the necessary 
public r esolve should stTonger military measures be needed . 
:F'inally it 
vas directed at the U.S. public) vhose appreciation of national i nterests 
i n Southeast Asia might be strengthened through obseTvation of combined 
executive-legislative and bipartisan political support . 43/ 
The United Nations was t he target of a separate statement) on 
5 August) as A~bassador Stevenson described the events in the Gulf for 
members of the Security Council and specifically related the DRV provoca-
tion to the wider campaign of terror and i nfiltrati on occurTing i n South 
Vietnam and laos . 44/ 
This address was designed to establish the 
l egitjmacy of nur actions in the Gulf under ~rovisions of the UN Charter 
and to reaffirm that U. S. policy in Southeast Asia hdd I jmited aims and 
vffiZbased on upholding provi sions of existi ng i nternational agr eements . 
The third communication ",-Tas directed specifically to HanOi) on 
10 August) through the Canadian I.C.C. repTesentative and was intended 
to strengthen the warning which he conveyed on his initial visit . 
In 
14 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
addition to repeating points made earlier) Seaborn ' s second message 
conveyed the U.S . Government ' s QDcertainty over DRV intentions i n 
the 4 August attack and explained that subsequent U. S. dep loym~nts of 
additional airpower to South Vietnam and Thailand were "precautionary." 
In addition) tile new message stressed: 
(1) -';hat the Tonkin Gulf events 
demonstrated that "U.S. public and official pati ence " was wearing thin; (2) 
that the Congressional Resolution reaffirmed U.S. determination "to con-
tinue to oppose firmly) by all necessary means) DRV efforts to subvert 
and conquer South Vietnam and Laos "; and ( 3) that "if the DRV persists 
in its present course) it can expect to suffer the consequences ." 45/ 
Thus) i n the immediate aftermath of t he provocation handed· the U.S. 
Government in the Tonkin Gulf, the Administration was able to carry out 
most of the actions recommended by its principal offici als early in the 
summer. 
By the same token) it was reducing the nlwber of unused measures 
short of di rect military action that had been c.onceived as available for 
exerting effective pressure on the DRV. 
In effect, as i t made its com-
mitments in Southeast Asia clearer it also deepened them, and i n the 
process it denied itself access to some of the uncommitting opti ons which 
it had perceived earlier as .offering policy flexibility . 46/ 
Meamrhile, 
other events were also having the effect of denying options which had 
been considered useful alternatives to strikes against the North . 
15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
III 
POST-TONKIN POLICY ASSESSMENTS 
The Tonkin Gulf incidents were important not only because of 
what they enabled the United States to do in response -- but also 
because of the way what was done began to be regarded by policy-
makers . 
The fact that U.S. forces had responded to hostile acts by 
making direct attacks on North Vietnam) albeit limited ones under 
unique circumstances) had rather significant impacts on the Adminis-
tration's policy judgments. 
These impacts appeared as it became 
i ncreasingly evident that the United States actually had fewer options 
than it once believed available . 
DILEMMAS IN hAOS 
One of the areas where the Administration first saw its freedom 
of action being impaired was Laos . 
Prior to the events in Tonkin Gulf) the situation in Laos had 
become increasingly complex) thus making U.S. policy choices increasingly 
delicate. 
Since the end of May) U.S. hopes for a stabilized Laos had 
been based l argely on a Polish proposal to convene a preliminary con-
ference among six nations . 47/ 
Particularly promising 'vas the Soviet 
Union ' s willingness to support the proposal. 
TOI.rard the end of June) 
as the Laotian government warned of the imminent threat of a major 
communist offensive near Muong Soui) the Soviet Union asked Great 
Britain to postpone efforts toward such a conference) and the Poles 
seemed to back 8\vay from their original initiative . 
On 25 July the 
Soviet Union announced her return to the 14- Nation formula) and threatened 
to resign her co-chairman role if a conference were not called . 48/ The 
Soviet threat to withdrau from the international machinery that is basic 
to the neutralist Laotian government ' s claim to legitimacy "ras a matter 
of considerable mutual concern in Vientiane and Washington . 49/ 
One of the major reasons for U.S. support of the Polish 6-Nation 
preliminary conference \.,ras its value in forestalling pressure for a 
Geneva-type meeting . 
It vas hoped that such a conference could be pro-
longed veIl into the autumn to give the political and military situation 
in South Vietnam time to be improved) and to build a more favorable 
political climate for an eventual 14-Nat ion conference on Laos . 
The 
latter could be accomplished) it vas hoped) by: 
(1) demonstrating the 
extent of comrr.u.nist responsibility for laot5an instabilityj (2) getting 
the I.C.C. to function more effectively; (3) strengthenirrg international 
backing for Souvanna ' s position; and (4) thereby obtaining support for 
his insistence on Pathet Lao "rithdra\val from the Plaine des Jarres as a 
precondition for a nev Geneva settlement . 50/ 
Insofar as Laos was 
concerned) the United States recognized that a nei-l conference "ras probably 
desirable) as long as it did not occur too soon . 
HOIvever.) it also recog-
nized the suspicion vith vhich the GVN I-Tould regard any kind of negotiations 
. 16 
TOP SECRP.f - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
over Southeast Asia and the likelihood that back- corridor discussions 
of the Vietnamese problem would be an almost i nevitable by-product . 
In time such a procedure might be useful) but for the balance of 1964 
it was to be avoided in order to promote GVN stability and encourage 
a more vigorous GVN war effort . 51/ 
The pressure for a Geneva-type conference had been building ever 
since the resumption of fighting in Laos in May. 
The chief protagonist 
in the quest for negotiations was France) who first proposed reconvening 
the 14-Nation Conference to deal with the crisis on 20 May . 
What made 
French policy so dangerous to U.S. interests) however) was that its 
interest in a Geneva solution applied to Vietnam as well . 
On 12 June) 
DeGaulle publicly repeated his neutralization theme for all Indo-China 
and called for an end to all foreign intervention there; on 23 July he 
proposed reconvening the 1954 Geneva Conference to deal with the problems 
of Vietnam. 
The Soviet Union ' s return to the 14-Nation formula in July (it 
had endorsed the original French proposal before indicating willingness 
to support the 6- Nation approach) indicated solidarity in the communist 
camp. 
The call was endorsed by North Vietnam on the follovring day . 
Communist China first annoQnced support for a 14-Nation Conference (on 
Laos ) on 9 June) repeating this through notes to the co- chairman calling 
on the 13th for an "emergency meeting ." 
On 2 August) the Chinese urged 
the USSR not to carry out its threat to abandon its co- chairman role) 
apparently viel-ring such a development as jeopardizing the possibilities 
for a Geneva settlement . 52/ 
Great Britain also urged the Russians to stay on) and during the 
l ast days of July it attempted to make arrangements in Moscow to con-
vene a 14-Nation assembly on Laos . 
The negotiations failed because 
Britian i nsisted on Souvanna ' s prerequisite that the communists withdraw 
from positions taken in May and was Qnable to gain Soviet acquiescence . 
However) U.S. leaders Here aHare that Britain ' s support on this point 
could not be counted on indefinit ely in the face of increasing pressure 
in the direction of Geneva . 53/ 
In the meantime) hovrever) Laotian military efforts to counter the 
con@unist threat to key routes and control points west of the Plaine 
des Jarres ,fere shOldng great success . 
As a result of a counteroffensive 
(Operation Triangle)) government forces gained control of a considerable 
amotmt of territory that gave promise of assuring access betHeen the 
hro capitals (Vientiane and Luang Prabang) for the first time in three 
years . 2~/ 
In effect) the government ' s nel-rly won control of territory and 
communication routes in Central Laos created a ne\{ and more favorable 
balance of pOl{er in that country) which i n the perceptions of the Admin-
istration should not be jeopardized . 
A threat to this balance from 
either (1 ) cownunist reactions to additional pressure) or (2) Laotian 
i nsistence on extending their offensive into the Plaine des Jarres ,I-ras 
cited to discourage proposals near t~e end of July to permit the VNAF to 
, 17 
TOP SECRl'iI' - SensHive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
bomb infiltration r outes in the Laotian Panhandl e . 55/ 
This "don 't 
rock the boat " poli cy was given added encouragementwhen} on 1 August} 
Great Britain initiated a promising effort toward a new di pl omatic 
solution . 
Acting on Souvanna Phouma ' s request} the British government 
urged the I.C. ~ . members to arrange a meet i ug among the three Laotian 
political factions. 56/ 
Concern over not provoking a communist mili tary escalati on that 
would upset the relatively stabilized situation in Laos figured promi-
nently in a t entative analysis of U.S. strategy for Southeast Asia made 
and circulated for comment by the State Department in mid-August . 
It 
had a significant impact on the Administration ' s assessment of its opti ons 
in the post-Tonkin period . 
Among other effects} this concern caused i t 
to i-Tithhold for several weeks its approval of continuing proposals for 
air and ground i nitiatives in the Panhandle as means to improve the 
situation in South Vietnam . 57/ 
CONCERN OVER PRESSURES FOR NEGOrrIATIONS 
One of the Tonkin Gulf impacts i'Thich was perceived i-Tithin the 
Administration served to exacerbate its policy dilemmas r egardi ng Laos . 
Administration official s Here apprehensive that the international crisis 
precipitated by incidents in the Gulf might intensify the kind of Geneva 
conference pressures generated previously . 58/ 
Administration concern 
was apparently well founded . 
On 5 August UN Secretary General U Thant 
stated that the 14- Nation assembly should be reconvened to deal ivith the 
Tonkin Gulf debate then being urged on the UN Security Council . 
( He 
had earlier urged reconvening the 1954 Conference to negotiate a Vietnam 
settlement .) THO days later) during the debate} the French delegation 
urged the calling of a conference for the pacification of all of Indo-
China . 
Reports appeared on 10 August that the Chinese People ' s Daily 
published an editorial arguing that a Geneva settl ement ivaS the only 
effective i-Tay to solve the problem of South Vietnam . 
On the 19th) in 
a note r ejecting potential UN Security CouBcil findings regarding 
r esponsibility for the Tonkin Gulf i ncidents} North Vietnam declared 
its insistence on a Geneva conference . 59/ 
Such Has the Administration ' s concern in the immediate aftermath 
of the crisis} that it contemplated a diplomatic i nitiative relating to 
laos that i-TaS designed to counteract the expected pressure . 
Reflecting 
a point of vieiv r eportedly also becoming attractive to Souvanna Phouma:, 
the State Department sought reactions to a policy d:i_rection that i-TOuld 
no longer insist. on Pathet Lao 'ivithdrawal from the Plaine des Jarres as 
a precor"ditior. to an international conferem·e . 
The ga i ns r ecently 
achieved through "Operation Triangle" i-rere so significant} it reasoned} 
that they more than offset c ommlli~ist control of the Plaine . 
And it was 
clear that any negot iations by which a conunu..."1.ist wHhdrmraJ might be 
arranged iVQuld include rec iprocal demands for the government to r elinquish 
its recently won gains . 60/ 
Moreover) passage of the Congress ional 
Resolution and the strongDRV naval attacks had accomplished the exact 
kind of actions believed to be necessary earlier to demonstrate U.S. 
,18 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
firmness in the event negotiating pressure should become compelling . 61/ 
Reactions to this tentative policy change were unfavorable : 
It 
was seen as lik21y to have a demoralizing imract on the GVN. 
It was 
al so seen as possibly eroding the impression of strong U. S. resolve) 
which the reprisal air strikes were believed to have created . 
For 
example) Ambassador Taylor cabled : 
If ••• rush to conference table would serve to confirm to 
CHICOMS that U.S . retaliation for destroyer attacks was 
transient phenomenon and that firm CHICOM response in form of 
commitment to defend NVN has given U. S. "Paper tiger " second 
thoughts .. . . 
If In Vietnam sudden backdmm from previousl y strongly held 
U. S. position on [plaine des Jarre~7 YTithdravTal prior to con-
ference on laos \Vould have potentially disastrous effect . 
Morale and will to fight and particular lvillingness to push 
ahead with arduous pacifj.cation task ... would be undermined by 
YThat YTould look like evidence that U. S. seeking to take advantage of 
any slight improv~nent in non- Communist Eosition as excuse for 
extricating itself from Indo- China via Lconferenc~7 route .... 
"Under Circumstances) I{e see very little hope 
of such a conference \-Tould be advantageous to us . 
prospects of limiting it to considerat ion of only 
problem appear at this time juncture to be dimmer 
CONCERN OVER TOEKIN REPRISAL SIGNALS 
that results 
Moreover) 
laotian 
than ever .... " 62/ 
Contained in Ambassador Taylor ' s vielvs was yet another of the 
Administration ' s reflections on the impact of the Tonkin Gulf incidents . 
Officials developed mixed feelings regarding the effect of the Tonkin 
r eprisals for Signaling firm U. S. commitments in Southeast Asia . 
On 
one hand) i t \Vas conceded that the reprisals and the actions 'i{hich accom-
panied them represented the most forceful expression of U.S . resolve to 
date . 
Improvements vTere perceived in South Vietnamese morale) and the 
combination of force and restraint demonstrated was believed effective 
in interrupting communist momentum and forcing a reassessment of U.S . 
intentions . 63/ 
On the other hand) they r eflected concern that these 
effects might not last and that the larger aspects of U.S . determination 
might still be unclear . 
Several officials and agencies i ndicated that our actions in the 
.Tonkin Gulf represented only one step along a continually demanding 
route for the United States . 
They expressed relief that if a persuasive 
impression of firrnness were to be created relative to the general security 
of Southeast ASia ) He could not rest on our laurels . 
Ambassador Taylor 
expressed the limited impact of the Tonkin Gulf action as follmTs : 
.19 
TOP SECRE.I' - Sensitive 
'il 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"It should be remembered that our retaliatory action 
in Gulf of Tonkin is in effect an isolated U.S .-DRV i ncident . 
Although this has relation ... to /the7 larger problem of DRV 
aggression by subvers i on in Viet-Nam- and Laos, we have not 
(repeat nl)t ) yet come to grips in a for ::eful way IoTith DRV 
over the i ssue of this l arger and much more complex problem . 64/ 
Later, he described a need for subsequent actions that would convey 
to Hanoi that "the operational rul es Hith respect to the DRV are 
changing." 65/ 
Assistant Secretary of State Bundy believed that Hanoi 
and Peking had probably been convinced only "that we will act strongly 
where U.S. force units are directly involved ... /that7 in other r espects 
the communi st side may not be so persuaded that- we are prepared to take 
stronger action .... " 
He saH the need for a continuous "combination of 
military pressure and some form of communication" to cause Hanoi to 
accept the idea of "getting out" of South Vietnam and Laos . 66/ 
CINCPAC 
stated that '\That we have not done and must do is make plain to Hanoi 
and Peiping the cost of pursuing their current objectives and impeding 
ours .... Our actions of August 5 have created a momentum which can lead 
to the attainment of our objectives in S.E. Asia .... It is most important 
t hat He not lose this momentum." 67/ 
The JCS urged actions to "sustain 
the U. S. advantage ;recently7 gained, " and later caut ioned: 
"Failure to 
r eswne and maintain-a program of pressure through military actions ... 
could si~nal a lack of resolve ." (J3/ 
vlhat these advisors had in mind by vlay of actions varied somewhat 
but only in the extent to IoThich they were willing to go in the immedi-
ate future . 
Bundy stressed that policy commitments must be such that 
U.S. and GVN hands could be kept free for military actions against DRV 
infiltration routes in Laos . 
Ambassador Taylor, CINCPAC and t he JCS 
urged prompt air and ground operations across the Laotian border to 
interrupt the current (though modest ) southlorard flow of men and supplies . 
Both Taylor and CINCPAC indicated the necessity of building up our 
"readiness posture" to undertake stronger actions -- through additional 
deployments of forces and l ogi stical support el ements and strengthening 
of the GVN poli tical base . 
The mood and attitudes reflected in these viewpoints were concrete 
and dramatic expressions of the increased U.S. commitment stemming from 
the Tonkin Gu~f incidents . 
They were candidly summed up by CINCPAC in 
his statement: 
" 
. 
... pressures against the other side once instituted should 
not be relaxed by any actions or lack of them which would destroy 
the benefits of the reHarding steps previously taken .... 11 69/ 
IncreaSingly voiced by officials from many quarters of the Admin-
i stration and from the professional agenc i es were arguments which said, 
i n effect, nml that Ile have gone this far we cannot afford to stop and 
go no farther; our original Signal must continually be reinforced . 
Vlhat 
20 
~[,OP SECREl' - Se n sit i ve 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
was not stated -- at l east not i n documentary form -- were estimates 
of how long the process might have to continue or to what extent the 
acti ons might have to be carried . 
RRASSERTICN OF THE ROSTOW THESIS 
Soon after the Tonkin Gulf incidents State Department Counselor 
Walt RoStm-T reformulated and circulated his earlier thesis that insurgencies 
supported by external pm-lers must be dealt with through measures to 
neutralize the sources of that support . 
First presented to President 
J ohnson in December 1963, variations on this theme had been proposed by 
Rostow at various times throughout 1964, the most recent occasion being 
. i n June, right after the Honolulu Conference . 70/ 
Nm-r in mi d-August , 
his newl y articulated arguments were passed to~he White House, Depart-
ment of State, Department of Defense and the JCS. 
The ItRostm·r thesis It vTaS generalized -- not explicitly dealing with 
a particular insurgency - - but it was evident that considerati ons of the 
U.S. dilem~as in Southeast Asia affected its formulation. 
It started wi th 
a proposition: 
"By applying limited, graduated military act i ons reinforced 
by political and economic pressures on a nation providing 
external support for insurgency, we should be able to cause 
that nation to decide to r educe greatly or eliminate altogether 
support for the i nsurgency. 
The objective of these pressures 
i s not necessarily to attack his ability to provide support, 
although economic and certain military actions vTQuld in fact 
do j ust that·. 
Rather, the objective is to affect his calculation 
of i nterests . 
Therefore, the threat that i s implicit i n initial 
U.S. actions vmuld be more important than the military effect of 
the actions themselves . II 71/ 
In Rostow ' s view, the target government ' s Itcalculation of interests" 
could be affected by a number of factors , none of which vlould preclude, 
havrever, the need for effective counterinsurgency programs vrithin the 
country already under attack. 
The factors included: 
(1) loss, and fear 
of further loss, of military and economic facilities; (2) fear of involve-
ment in a much larger conflict; (3) fear of increased dependence upon, 
and loss of independent action to, a maj or communist country; and (4 ) fear 
of internal political upheaval and loss of power . 
The coercive impacts 
of the pressures vrere to be their principal objectives . 
Significant (in 
vie\{ of currently espoused rationale for increased pressures on North 
Vietnam ) vTaS t:le explicit caution that improred morale in the country 
troubled by insurgency and Itimproved U. S. bargaining l everage in any 
i nternational conference on the conflict lt were to be cons i dered merely 
as "bonus effects.·" 
The coercive pressure vTaS to result from "damaging military actions It 
coupled. with concurrent political, economic and psychological pressures . 
The former could include selective or full naval blockade and Itsurgicallt 
21 
TOP SECREr - SensUive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - SensHi ve 
destruction of specific targets by aerial bombardment or naval gunfire . 
They could be supported by such non-destructive military acti ons as 
aerial reconnaissance) harassment of civi l avi ation and maritime com-
merce) mock ai:" attacks) and timely concentr:ltions of U. S . or allied 
forces at sea or near land borders . 
Foll owing a line of reasoning 
prevalent i n the Government during the early 60 1 s ) Rostow observed 
t hat a target government might well r educe its insurgency supporting 
role in the fac e of such pressures because of the communists I proverb i al 
"tactical flexibility . " 72/ 
The thesis was subj ected to a rather thorough analysis in OSD/ISA 
and coordinated with the Department of State . 
The nature of thi s revi ew 
wi ll be discussed on later pages and in a different context . 
ACCOMPANYING PAUSE IN PRESSURES 
The foregoing policy assessments were conducted in an atmosphere 
rel atively free of even those pressure measures that preceded the 
Tonkin Gulf crisis . 
Since the force deployments of 6 August ) l i ttle 
mil itary activity had been directed at the DRV . 
U-2 flights over North 
Vietnam and r econnaissance of the Laotian Panhandle were continued . 
Military oper ations .. lithin Laos .. Tere limHed to the consolidation of 
ga ins achieved in Operation Triangl e . 
A deliberate stand- dmrn \las 
adopted for all other activities -_ including DE SOTO Patrols and the 
GVN ' s covert haraSSing operations . 
The purpose of this "holding phase) I! 
as it vas called) was to "avoid actions that would in any vay take .the 
onus off the Communist side for ithe Tonki~7 escalation . I! 73/ 
HmTever) during the "holding phase " some of the administratj.ve 
impediments to wider military action were cleared 8V18Y . 
One measure 
that vTaS taken was to relax the operating restrictions and the rules 
of engagement for U.S . forces in Southeast As ia . 
This vTaS accomplished 
i n response to JCS urging that attacking forces not be permitted sanctuaries 
from "Thich to regroup and perhaps repeat their hostile acts . 74/ 
Pri or 
rul es had not permitted pursuit of hostile aircraft outside South Vietnam 
or authorized intercept of intruders over Thailand . 75/ Under the revi sed 
rules of 15 August 1964) u. S. forces "Tere authorized to attack and destroy 
any vessel or aircraft ''.,Thich attacks ) or gives positive indication of 
i ntent to attack " U.S. forces operating in or over international waters 
and in Laos) to include hot pursuit into the territorial waters or air 
space of North Vietnam and into the air space over other cOlLl1tries of 
Southeast Asia . 
"Hostile aircraft over South Vietnam and Thai land l! could 
be engaged as ':rell and pursued into North Vi ~tnam ) Laos and Cambodia . 76/ 
Another prerequisite to wider military action that was accomplished 
was the combined GVN-U.S. planning for cross-border grolL71d operations . 
By 16 August) this had proceeded to such an extent that COMUStvlACV believed 
i t necessary to seek approval of the concept and appropriate to urge that 
Phase I of the prograni. get underway . 
Significant for understanding the 
pressure for \Vider actions increas ingly being brought to bear on the 
.22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Administration "\oras the fact that NACV made the request despite explicit 
comment that the concept ,.,ras "an overly ambitious scheme . If 77/ Presum-
ably~ he considered it likely to be ineffecti ve militarily) but perhaps 
important in stimulating more vigorous GVN efforts . 
Imatever his particu-
lar r easons at the time) M_Acv repeated the recommendations later i n the 
month as part of several measures to be taken inside and outside South 
Vietnam . 
These vere designed "to give the VC a bloody nose) " to steady 
the neHly r eformed South Vietnamese government) and to raise the morale 
of the population . 78/ 
Ho,lever) the earlier MACV cable had already 
acknmvledged What must have been one of the Administrat;i.on ' s key inhibitions 
against undertaking cross-border actions: 
General Westmoreland stated) 
"It should be r ecognized that once this operation is initiated by the GVN) 
U. S . controls may be marginal. " 
The period of the Ifholding phase If ,.,ras also a period of significant 
developments "\orithin South Vietnam . 
Ambassador Taylor ' s initial report 
(10 August ) made clear that the political situation "\oras already precarious) 
giving Khanh only a 50- 50 chance of staying in pover and characterizing 
the GVN as ineffect ive and fraught vith conflicting purposes . 
In Taylor ' s 
viev) the leadership in Saigon shoved symptoms of "defeatism lf and a hesi-
tancy to prosecute the pacification campaign Irithin South Vietnam . 
Mean-
"\orhile) however) its popular support in the cOll..1'1tryside seemed to be directly 
proport ional to the degree of protection ,.,rhich the govermnent provided . 79/ 
In viev of this shaky political base) General Khanh seized upon the occasion 
of Post - Tonkin euphoria -- apparently "\orith Ambassador Taylor's encouragement 
to acquire additional executive authority . 
On 7 August) announcing the 
necessity for certai n "emergency If pmrers to cope ,rith any heightened VC 
activity) he proclaimed himself President and promulgated the Vung Tau 
Charter . 
This action) vhich gave him virtually dictatorial pover over 
several aspects of South Vietnamese life) met vith hostile reactions . 
In 
late August) Khanh ' s authority vas challenged in the streets of Saigon) 
Hue and Da Nang) during several days of student protest demonstrations 
and clashes betveen Buddhist and Catholic groups . 
In respons e to student 
and Bud~hist pressures primarily) he resigned his recently assumed post 
as Presldent and promised that a national assemblage would be called to 
form a more popularly based government. 
On 3 September) Khanh returned 
to assume the premiership) but clearly Fith veaker and more conditional 
authority than before the government crisis. 
Neanvhile) as the GVN's lack of cohesion and stability vas being 
demonstrated) the infiltration of communist forces into South Vietnam may 
have been on the increase . 
At least) belief in an increase in the rate of 
this infiltration apparently gained currency in various U.S. agencies at 
this time . 
The documents available to this vrHer from the period neither 
r efute nor substantiate the i ncrease) but sEveral of them contained 
references to this perception. 
For example) a State Department memo-
randum) dated 24 August; ack1'1o\dedged a "rise and change in the nature 
of infiltration in recent Iflonths . " 80/ 
I.8.ter analyses confirmed that 
increas e s had taken place) but the precise period "\orhen they began \-ras 
not identified. 81/ 
Hence) unless there Here other intelligence data 
to confirm them) any naplications regarding North Vietnamese policy deci-
sions '{ere largely speculative. 
23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREI' - Sensi.t ive 
Possibly influencing the judgments of August vas the fact that 
increased communist movement of men and supplies to the South vas 
expected) resulting in part from a DIA assessment (7 August) of the 
most likely Dm- r eactions to the Tonkin repr~ sals . 82/ 
Moreover) the 
State Department ' s analysis of next courses of action in Southeast Asia 
had made "clear evidence of greatly increased infiltration from the 
N?rth" an explicit condition for any policy judgment that "systematic 
military action against DRV" vas requir~d during the balance of 1964 . 83/ 
And leading officials from several agencies. were beginning to feel that 
such action might be inevitabl e . 
The combined effects of the signs of increased VC infiltration and 
of continuing upheaval in Saigon caused great concern in Washington . 
The central perception vas one of impending chaos and possible failure 
i n South Vietnam . 
Among several agencies) the emerging mood vas that 
some kind of action ,vas urgently needed - - even if it had the effect merely 
of improving the U.S . image prior to pulling out . 
It vas this mood that 
prevailed as the period of "pause " drev to a close . 
24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.' 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve 
IV 
NEXT COURSES OF ACT ION 
By early September a general consensus had developed among high-
l evel Administrat i on officials that some form of addi tional and con-
tinuous pressure should be exerted against North Vietnam . 
Though Laos 
was r elati vely stabilized) the situation there Ims recognized as dependent 
ultimately on the degree of success achi eved in solving the problems of 
Vietnam . 
Pacification efforts withi n South Vietnam were regarded as 
i nsufficient by themsel ves to reverse the deteriorating trends in that 
country . 
As a r esult) offici al s from both civilian and military agenc i es 
were anxious to resume and to extend the program of military actions against 
communi st forces outside its borders . 
STRATEGY MEETING IN SEPTEMBER 
How to go about this was a problem of great concern to top- level 
officials (the PreS i dent) Secretary Rusk) Secretary McNamara ) General 
Wheeler) Ambassador Taylor) CIA Director McCone ) as they assembled in 
Washington on 7 September . 
The main purpose of the meeting was to dis-
cuss with Ambassador Taylor future courses of U. S. and GVN action) 
particularly as related to the liaplications of the r ecent political up-
heaval i n Saigon . 
The alternatives present ed for discussion were based largely on 
r esponses to the tentative analysis circulated by the State Department 
in mid-August . 
Replies from CINCPAC and the Saigon and Vientiane embassi es 
had been circulated) and they provided the basis for a number of questions 
which Ambassador Taylor ' s party was asked to be ready to di scuss . 84/ JCS 
reactions to the analysis and to the earlier r eplies were submitted to the 
Secretary of Defense Hith the specifi c intent that they be cons idered at 
the meeting and presumably "Tere passed to other participating agencies . 85/ 
OSD/ISA views "Tere prepared by Assistant Secretary McNaughton on 3 September 
and Here known at least to Assistant Secretary of State Bundy. 86/ 
J ust prior to the meeting) the J CS urged that General Wheeler) their 
Chai rman) propose a course of action involving air strikes aga inst targets 
i n North Vietnam appearing on the JCS-approved) 94-target list . 90/ This 
kind of action had been recommended before - - most r ecently on 2~August ) 
i n response to the Department of State analysis -- as a means of "destroying 
the DRV Ivill and capabilities) as necessary) to continue to support the 
i nsurgencies in South Vietnam and Laos . " 
What made this proposal particu-
larly significant "IoTas that it called for deliberate attempts to provoke the 
DRV into taking actions "IoThich could then be ansHered by a systematic U.S . 
air campaign . 
According to the JCS scheme) the campai gn ilwould be continuous 
and in ascending severity)" "IoTith its tempo and intensity varied as required 
by enemy reactions . 
Targets Hou~d eventually include airfields) bridges) 
railroads ) military installations) industrial facilities and armed route 
r econnaissance along the IDC' s . 
The JCS argued that such actions Here nOVT 
"essential to prevent a complete collapse of the U.S. position in the 
Republic of Vietnm"fl and Southeast AsiC) ) " because "continuation of present 
or foreseeable programs Limited to the RVN \lill not produce the desired 
· 25 
TOP. SECRET - Sensitive 
// '7 
1 I 
r esult ." 88/ 
memorandum. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Quite similar language also appeared i n the 26 August 
Whether or not or in ivhat form General Wheeler presented this pro-
posal to the assembled officials on 7 September is not indicated i n the 
docwnentary sources available . 
The JCS belief in the necessity of bombing 
North Vietnam was discussed; as was some of their rationale . 
Made explicit; 
for example; was their argument that there was no reason to delay the 
bombing since (in their vie,.,) the situation in South Vietnam would only 
become worse . 89/ 
That the idea of deliberately provoking a DRV reaction 
was discussed in some form is indicated in a record of the consensus arrived 
at i n the discussions. 90/ 
However; the JCS were not the only official s 
who favored such an idea.-
Assistant Secretary McNaughton ' s "Plan of Action " 
(3 September 1964) also called for actions that "should be likely at some 
point to provoke a military DRV r esponse ." The latter; in turn; "should be 
likely to provide good grounds for us to escalate if we Hished ." 91/ 
The principal confereees di d not beli eve that deliberatel y provocative 
actions should be undertaken "in the immediate future while the GVN is still 
struggling to its feet ." 
HO'ivever; they apparently reached a consensus 
that they might reconLrnendsuch actions -- "depending on GVN progress and 
Communist reaction i n the meantime " - - by early October . 92/ 
The reasons cited for their opposition to provocative acts were also 
applied in r e jecting proposals for an immediate bombing campaign . 
The 
GVN i-TaS expected to be too \-Teak for the United States to assume the "delib -
erate risks of escalation that would involve a major role for; or threat 
to; South Vietnam. II 93/ 
In the discussion; Mr . McCone observed that 
undertaking a sustained att ack on the DRV Hould be very dangerous; due to 
the Heakness and unpredictability of the politi cal base in South Vietnam. 
Secretary Rusk stated the vieH that every means short of bombing must be 
exhausted . 
Secretary McNamara affirmed his understanding that IIwe are not 
acting more strongly because there is a clear hope of strengthening the 
GVN." But he I·Tent on to urge that the i-TaY be kept open for stronger actions 
even if the GVN did not improve or in the event the ,mr "Tere wi dened by 
the communi sts . 
It is interesting to note that the President asked speci-
fically; IICan i-Te rea.lly strengthen the GVN?" 94/ 
Even though the prinCipals did not accept the JCS proposal and appar-
ently did not agree vrith their assessment of the chances for improvement 
in South Vietnam; they did indicate accord Hith the JCS sense of the 
gravity of the U.S. predicament . 
In response to Gener al vmeeler ' s state-
ments that lIif the Uni.ted Sta.tes loses in South Vietnam; it Hill lose a.ll 
of Southeast A[~ ta " and that its positi0D thrr'JUghout all of Asia i-Tould be 
damaged; both McCone and Rusk indicated agreement . 
Ambassador Taylor 
. stated theviei-T that the United States could not afford to let Ho Chi Minh 
win in South Vietnam . 
Secretary Rusk added the considerat ion that the 
whole Horld doubted our a~ility to pull i t off . 95/ 
26 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The meeting resulted in consensus among the principals on certain 
courses of prompt action to put additional pressure on North Vietnam . 
The following measures were recommended to the President for his decision: 
"1. 
U. S. naval patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin should be 
resumed immediately (about September 12). 
They should operate 
i nitially beyond the 12-mile limit and be cl early di ssociated 
from 34A maritime operations .... 
112. 
34A operations 
t hereafter (next week) . 
most important .... 
by the GVN should be resumed immediately 
The maritime operations are by far the 
113 . 
Limited GVN air and ground operations into the corridor 
areas of Laos should be undertaken in the near future) together 
with Lao air strikes as soon as we can get Souvanna ' s permissi on . 
These operations will have only limited effect, however . 
IIl~. 
We should be prepared to respond on a t it-for-tat basis 
against the DRV L8gainst specific and related targ et~7 in the event 
of any attack on U.S. units or any speci al DRV/VC action against SVN.
1I96/ 
The purposes for these measures were conceived as : 
(1) "to assist morale 
in SVN)" (2 ) to "show the Communists vre still mean business, " and (3)"to 
keep the risks Imr and under our control at each stage . II 
IMPL&~ENTING ACTIONS 
These recommendations (and presumably the purposes ) were approved 
by the PreSident and became the basis for a program of limited (though 
not continuous ) pressures exerted against North Vietnam from mid- September 
to mid-December 1964. 
On 10 September) the White House issued a National 
Security Action Memorandum vhich authorized immedi ate resumption of t he 
DE SOTO Patrols and prompt discussions vith the Government of Laos to 
develop plans for cross-border operations . 
It also authorized r esumption 
of 34A operations folloving completion of the DE SOTO Patrol, vlith the 
additional guidance that IIwe should have the GVN ready to admit that they 
are taking place and to justify and legitimize them on the basis of the 
facts of VC infiltration by sea ." 97/ 
It is significant that although 
this order) in effect) authorized the init iation of Phase III (October 
through December) of the covert operations under OPLAN 34A) it specified 
contrary to the provisions of Phase III that "we should not consider air 
strikes under '34A for the present. " 
Naval Operations . 
The resumption of naval patrol and covert 
maritime operations off the coast of North Vietnam did not proceed exactly 
as planned . 
The destroyers U.S.S. Morton and U.S.S. Edwards embarked on 
the third DE saro Patrol on 12 September . 
On the night of the 18th) vrhile 
on a southeasterly heading, the ships made a surface radar contact vrhich 
vTaS observed to split into tvro images, increase speed and close rapidly . 
27 
TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Approximately 40 minutes after first contact and after firing a varning 
shot) Morton and Edvards opened fire) both scorLng hits . 
Subsequently) 
on tvo separate occasions after the target images had disappeared from 
the radar) nev ~ontacts appeared and vere fired on at a range of approxi-
mately 8)500 yards) hits again being indicated for both vessels . 
In all) 
Morton fired 56 five-inch and 128 three-inch rounds; Edvards fired 152 
five-inch and 6 three-inch rounds . 
There vere no rounds or torpedoes 
reported .coming from the radar contacts . 98/ 
Later on the 18th (Washington 
time)) Pres i dent Johnson suspended the DESOTO Patrols; they vrere not to 
be resumed until February 1965 . 
In the aftermath of the third destroyer incident in the Tonkin 
Gulf) COvert GVN maritime operations vere not resumed until October . 
President Johnson authorized reactivation of this program on the 4th) under 
very tight controls. 99/ 
The proposed schedule of maritime operations had 
t~be submitted at the-beginning of each month for approval. 
Each opera-
tlon vas approved in advance by OSD (Mr . Vance)) State (Mr . L. Thompson 
or Mr . Forrestal) and the White House (Mr . McGeorge Bundy) . 100/ 
During 
October) these included tvo probes) an attempted junk capture) and ship-
to-shore bombardment of North Vietnamese radar sites . 
Later) they included 
undenvater demolition team assaults o~ bridges along coastal LOCfs . 
Unlike 
the DE SOTO Patrols these Qnacknovledged operations continued throughout 
the 
) 
year . 
. 
Actions in Laos . 
Operations in the Laotian Panhandle took shape 
vlth fe,·rer unpredictable developments. 
On 11 September) r epresentat ives 
of the U.S. missions in Laos 
Thailand and Vietnam met in Saigon to dis-
. 
) 
cuss llaplementation of the NSAM 314 provisions for cross-border air and 
ground operations. 
Regarding air operations) they agreed that if their 
primary objective vas military in nature) ffsharp) heavyff and concentrated 
attacks would be needed and that U. S . and/or VNAF/FABMGATE forces ,-TQuld be 
r equired . 
If their impact ioTaS intended to be primarily psychological 
(presumably affecting both communists and the GVN)) they believed that the 
01?erations could be more videly spaced) relying primarily on Laotian T- 28s 
vlth some U. S. strikes on harde:!' targets. 
In viev of Souvanna Phouma f s 
reported oPposition to VNAF strikes in the Panhandle) the representatives 
conceded that the slOl-rer paced operation vith RIAF aircraft offered the 
best .:~urse . ~/ Hmvever) they savr a joint Lao) Thai) R~N and U:S . 
. opera~lon as particularly desirable) vere it not for the tlille requlred 
to arrange it. 
As one means of symbolizing four pover support for the 
operation) they recommended that the Thai Government be approached r egarding 
use of the Kor~t base by participating U. S. aircraft . 102/ 
Regarding.cross-border ground operations) the representatives 
agreed that the southern and central Panhandle offered terrain and targets 
consistent vrith the available GVN assets . 
Although it vas recognized that 
accompanying U.S . advisors might be necessary to assure the success of the 
operations) the planners acceded to Vientiane fs objections that such a 
28 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
flagrant violation of the Geneva Accords would endanger the credibility 
of our political stance in Laos . 103/ 
Subsequent to the meeting) the 
Vientiane Embassy removed a reservation expressed earlier and cleared 
the way for company- size penetrations of up to 20 km along Route 9) near 
Tchepone . 104/ 
At the confer ence this operation was considered of high 
priority with respect to infiltration traffic into South Vietnam. 
The mission representatives agreed that) once the operations 
began) they sho1.J~d not be acknmrledged publicly . 
In effect) t hen) they 
would supplement the other covert pressures being exerted aga i nst North 
Vietnam . 
Moreover) while the Lao Government ,rould of course know about 
the operations of their T-28s) Souvanna was not to be informed of the 
GVN/U.S . operations . 
The unacknowledged nature of these operations would 
thus be easier to maintain . 
Accordingly) the r epresentatives r ecommended 
to Washington that Vientiane be authorized to approach the Laotian Govern-
ment r egarding initiation of T-28 operations . 
On the other hand) the 
Administration was asked to approve ground operations in three specified 
areas of the Panhandle . 105/ 
Over two weeks passed before these recommendati ons were acted on . 
In the meantime) the JCS also submitted proposals for implementing NSfu~ 314) 
r equesting immediate authority to implement air operations in the Panhandle. 
Endorsing the main theme of the mj.ssion representatives) they called for 
combined action by RLAF '1'-28s and U.S. aircraft which would provide "sup_ 
pressive fire " and attack heavily defended bridges . 
The JCS also sought 
authority to initiate GVN ground intelligence collection and target r econ-
naissance patrols in the Laotian corridor. 106/ 
On 6 October, authority was given the Vientiane Embassy to urge 
the Laotian Government to begin T-28 air strikes "as soon as possible ." 
The RLAF targets were to be selected from a previously coordinated 22-
target l ist) a f ew of which were designed for U.S. YANKEE TEAM strikes) 
but they were to exclude Mu Gia Pass . 
The latter mission ,ras kno,rn to 
require U.S. escort and suppressive fire, and a decision on whether to 
authorize such U. S. operations had not yet been made in l"ashington . 
More-
over) neither had the Admj.nistration authorized YANKEE TEAM strike missions 
aga inst the t01.J~her Panhandle targets . lOTI 
. 
Administration rationale on the issue of U.S. participation i n 
the Panhandle air strikes is not clear from the sources availabl e to this 
,Triter. 
Contemporary intelligence estimates indicated the communist 
r esponses ,,rere likely to be limited to (1) increases in antiaircraft deploy-
ments in the area) (2 ) propaganda attacks and (3) possible sabotage of U, S'/ 
GVN supporting bases . 108/ 
Hmrever) Washington I S vievl])oint on another 
Laotian request for air support may be significant . 
With respect to air 
strikes against targets along Route T) in support of the RLG campaign to 
consolidate its holdings vest of the Plaine des Jarres ) Administration 
rationale ,.las as follmTs : 
"Since we wish to avoid the llrrpression that \{e are 
taking /the7 first step in escalatio~ ) 'de [j3.rr::..7 inclined 
. 29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 303 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
/t07 defer decision on Route 7 strikes QDtil we have strong 
evidence /Of7 Hanoi's preparation for new attack in /the 
Plaine des Jarres7) some of \oThich might come from RIAF opera-
tions over the Route . " 109/ 
On 13 October, one day before the initial RLAF attacks) U.S . o 
strikes were again requested on four defended targets near Nape and 
Tchepone . 
They were to accompany T-28 strikes on commlli~ist military 
installations and supply points in the northern part of the Panhandle. 110/ 
The significance of these operations) and U. S. participation in them) was 
indicated a fel-1 days earlier in another meeting among representatives of 
the three missions. 
It was reported at this tLme that it was probable 
"that ARVN '{ill be uIlable /t07 afford detach..ment /Of7 any significant 
ground capability for /the-r8otian7 Corridor in /the; foreseeable future ." 
Therefore) air operations ,-TOuld offer the only dependable means of com-
batting VC infiltration through laos . 
The participants recorded "unanimous 
agreement that U.S. participation in air operatOions in Fh:=? corridor is 
essential if such operations are to have desired military and psychological 
impact." Emphasizing that the initiative for these operations came from 
the United States Government) they pointed out that failure to participate 
could result in loss of contOrol over them and could even jeopardize their 
continuation. 
At minimum the group recommended that U. S. aircraft fly 
CAP (combat air patrol) over the RLAF aircraft) as requested by the 
laotian Government and as permitted by a "relatively minor extension " 
of eXisting U.S . rules of engagement . 111/ 
CAP missions were approved) but U.S . air strikes against com-
munist LOCs in the laotian Panhandle were not authorized until much later 
in the year . 112/ 
Cross-border ground operations did not receive auth-
orization at any time during the period covered in this study . 
l';'EGOTL4TING POSTURE HE LAOS 
One reason for the delay in requesting laotian air strikes in the 
Panhandle was the need to a,·rait the uncertain outcome of discussions in 
Paris among leaders of the three laotian political factions . 
Since 27 August) 
when they first met) the three Princes (Souvanna PhoQma) Souphanouvang) 
and Boun Oum) had reached an impasse on conditions to accompany a cease-
fire . 
Souvanna PhoQma insisted on communist withdrawal from positions 
\Olon in the May offensive and had proposed neutralization of the Plaine des 
Jarres under I.C.C. supervision . 113/ 
On 15 September) when it seemed 
that further negotiations had become fruitless) Prince Souphanouvang 
offered to withdraH cOll1..munist forces from the Plaine in return for dis-
cussions l eading to a new 14-Nation Conference . 
The following day) Souvanna 
countered ,{ith a proposal that a cease-fire begin on 1 October and attempted 
. to verify and make more expljocit the mutual concessions . 
The pro- coIlLmunist 
leader balked over stipulated guarantees) such as I.C.C. supervision) that 
pro-communist forces 1-rouldo in fact 'i{ithdravr and be replaced by neutralists . 
HOHever) on the 21st) the leaders arrived at agreement for continued meetings 
at the ministerial level) based on an agenda ':lhich included a cease-fire 
30 
TOP SECRET - SensHive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and prelLminary conditions for reconvening a C~neva conference . 114/ 
The narrmr margin by which the cease-fire agreement failed: to come 
about dramatized the delicate nature of the Administration ' s diplomatic 
position in laos. 
Having agreed to support the tripartite discussions 
prior to the Tonkin Gulf i ncidents and prior to the political upheaval 
i n Saigon) it felt constrained to go along vlith them -- particularly 
if they served to forestall movement toward a Geneva-type negotiation . 
However) a laotian cease-fire was not compatible vith current perceptions 
of U. So interest even if it resulted in communist \·rithdrawal from the 
Plaine des Jarres . 
Ambassador Unger pointed out the contradictory nature 
of our position in his reply to the State Department ' s mid-August analys i s 
of future U.S. courses of action . 115/ 
Ambassador Taylor emphasized the 
need to maintain the option of operations in the Panhandle in his reply 
also) and the September discussions in Ivashington confirmed that his view 
was shared by most of the President's advisors . 
One could conclude that 
the United States was fortunate that Prince Souphanouvang was so intransi-
gent on the issue of I.C.C. sunervision. 
It is also possible that in 
i nSisting on this provision to"" the l eftist prince Souvanna Phouma "knew 
his manit -- perhaps reflecting perceptive American advice . 
Certainly the course of the tripartite discussions followed a 
pattern commensurate \-lith prior U.S. calculation . 
In an assessment of 
future courses of action used as the basis for the policy analysis cabled 
to affected interested embassies and CINCPAC by the State Department) 
Assistant Secretary Bundy characterized U.S. strategy with the statement) 
"w 
Id
' 
f 
It 
H th 
e wou 
wlsh to slmr dOvTn any progress tOlVard a con erence.... 
e 
en 
referred to a specific negotiating position proposed by AJnbassador Unger 
(a proposal for tripartite administration of the Plaine des Jarres ) as 
"a useful delaying gambit ." 116/ 
Significantly) this' proposal was 
advanced at Paris by Souvanna Phouma on 1 September -- illustrating the fact 
that Souvanna "\-Tas carefully advised by U. S. diplomats both prior to and 
during the Paris meetings . 117/ 
Other features of Souvanna ' s negotiating 
posture which apparently were encouraged as likely to have the effect of 
drawing out the discussions vTere insistence on cow_munist acceptance of 
(1 ) SOUVaQDa ' S political status as Premier and (2) lmhampered operations 
by the loC.C. 118/ 
It will be recalled that the latter point was the 
issue on IVhich progress tm18rd a cease-fire became stalled . 
It i s important to note here that the State Department recognized 
that Souvanna Phouma might "\-Tell act on his own and feel compelled to 
move toward a conference) even at the price of a cease-fire. 
In such 
an event, our position vTaS to be dependent on conditions in South Vietnam: 
"If the timing of the laos Conference) in relation to 
the degree of pressures Ive had then set in motion against the 
DRV) was such :that our attending or accepting the conference 
wou~d have major morale drawbacks in South Viet - Nam) \-le might 
well have to refuse to attend ourselves and to accept the dis-
advantage of having no direct participation . 
In the last analysis} 
GVN morale would have to be the deciding factor ." 119/ 
. 31 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
",,~~::: 
l- ............... 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECREr - Sensitive 
It i s apparent from thi s and other documents that GVN stability and 
morale were perceived by the Administration as the principal pacing 
elements for Southeast Asian policy in the post-Tonkin period . 
ANTICIPATlON OF WIDER ACTION 
. 
Through most of the strategy discussions of early autumn) South 
Vletnam was the main focus of attenti on . 
However) 'I-iith i ncreasing fre-
quency its political and military conditions "rere referred to in a ne"T 
way . 
More and more it was being evaluated in terms of its suitability 
as a base for wider action . 
Ambassador Taylor cautioned that "we should 
~ot get involved militarily with North Vietnam and poss ibly "Tith Red China 
If our base in South Viet Nam i s insecure and Khanh !s army i s tied down 
everywhere by the VC insurgency." 120/ 
At the September meeting) Mr . 
McCone criticized the actions recommended by the JCS as being very dangerous 
because of the current weakness of the GVN base . 
On 23 September) 
~Talt 
Rostow "Trote to Ambassador Taylor of the need for bui lding a more viable 
political system in South Vietnam "which vill provide us "Tith an adequate 
base for Ivhat we may l ater have to do ." 121/ 
General Scheme . 
The kind of operations for which "an adequate 
base" was increasi ngly considered essential is evident in a number of 
str~t:gy discussions of the period . 
Moreover) it i s clear that several 
~fflclals shared the expectation that these operations would begin early 
In the new year . 
It "Till be recalled that the series of actions recom-
mended to President Johnson by his top advisors at the end of May -- most 
of "Thich had been completed Ivithin a fe"T days of the Tonkin Gulb incidents 
were intended to culminate if necessary in a strike against North Vietnam 
, 
) )  
accompanied by an active diplomatic offensive that i ncluded agreement to a 
negoti ated settlement . 122/ 
Further) Phase I II of the approved contingency 
OPLAN 37-64) developed in response to NSAM 288) provided for the applicati on 
of overt graduated pressures against North Vietnam -- primarily air strikes . 
T~ese were to be carried out by the GVN) but I'Thich "Tould also include opera-
tlons by U.S. air and naval forces . 
Deployments of additional forces to 
Southeast Asia in early summer and i n the immediate aftermath of the Tonkin 
Gulf incidents were based on force requirements identified to support this 
plan . 
Its perceived significance during the post-Tonkin period vras indi-
cated When Ambassador Taylor reported that the objectives of the U. S . 
Mission in Saigon included preparation to implement OPJ..AN 37-64 "wi th opti-
mum r eadiness by January 1) 1965 ." 123/ 
Subsequent strategy discussions r eflected the extent to which 
'the nelV year was antiCipated as the occasion for beginning overt military 
operations aga:'..nst North Vietnam . 
Both the '3tate Department I s mid-August 
strategy analysis and the vorking paper on "Thich it ,\·ras based indicated 
'that the "limited pressures " 
( subs~guently authorized by NSAM 314) '\oTould 
extend "tentatively through December ." Hmrever) t hese actions "rereper-
ceived as "foreshadoHing systematic military action against the DRV) " which 
"we might at some point conclude ... '\Ias required . ", ( Noteivorthy is the point 
of vie'd that these actions mj_ght be ordered "ei ther because of incidents 
arising from {the l imited pressure~7 ~r because of deterioration in the 
.32 
TOP SECRET - Sensit i ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
situation in South Vietnam) particularly if there were to be cl ear evi-
dence of greatly increased infiltration from the north.") 
Should 
specific provocations not occur) a contingency target date of l, January 
1965 ~-ras indicated: 124/ 
" ... in (the7 absence of such major ne\ol developments 
/incidents or-increased infiltration7) \ole should probably 
be thinking of a contingency date for planning purposes) as 
suggested by Ambassador Taylor) of 1 January 1965 ." 125/ 
The working paper elaborated more fully than the cabl e the ki nd 
of preliminary actions considered necessary to set the stage . 
Some of 
t his elaboration Has provided in suggested language changes penciled-in by 
OSD prior to an inter- agency meeting called to discuss its contents . 
Refer-
r ing to air strikes in the Panhandle (proposed to begin in September)) a 
suggested OSD addition stated: 
"The strikes should probably be timed and 
plotted on the map to bring them to the borders of North Vietnam at the 
end of December ." The main body of the text suggested that the January 
operations include "action against infj.ltration routes and facilities " as 
"probably the best opening gambit. " 
It explained that · "the family of 
i nfiltration- related targets starts 1-rith clear military instal lations 
near the borders ;and7 can be extended almost at 1-rill northward ." The 
"next upward moveTr ~{as suggested to include action against IImilitary- related 
targets) II such. as "POL installations and the mj.ning of Haiphong Harbor" and 
"key bridges and railroads ." The purpose perceived for these operations 
was "to inflict progress ive damage- that would have a meaningful cumulative 
effect ." 126/ 
Ambassador Taylor viewed 1 January 1965 as a "target D- Day" before 
which the U. S. Mission and the GVN should develop "a PQsture of maximum 
readiness for a deliberate escalation of pressure against North Viet Nam." 
The nature of this escalation was perceived as "a carefully orchestrated 
bombing attack on NVN) directed primarily at infiltration and other mili-
t ary targets . " 
It iwuld consist of 
"u.s. r econnaissance planes) VN..4F/ FARMGATE air-
craft against those targets 'tThich could be attacked 
safely in spi te of the presence of the MIGs) and addi-
tional U.S . combat aircraft if necessary for the effective 
execution of the bombing programs . " 
He qualified this assessment with the observation) "We must always recog-
nize) hmrever) that events may force (the7 U.S . to advance D- Day to a 
considerably e[1.rlier date , " 
The reason for t,his qualification was Taylor ' s 
concern that the GVN might not be able to sustain its authority until 
. January . 
Thus) in order to "avoid the possible consequences of a collapse 
of national morale" it would be necessary) he felt) "to open the campaign 
against the DRV without delay . " The nature of the air campaign "would be 
essentially the same " as under the January scheme; except that it 1-rould 
rely "almost exclusively on U.S. military means ." 121/ 
. 33 
TOP SECRl']T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Similar assessments of timing in relati on to more vigorous . 
military action against North Vietnam were made in OSD/ ISA . 
The immed-
i ate measures proposed in McNaughton ' s draft "Plan of Action for South 
Vietnam" (3 SeI-tember ) were conceived not on::Ly as means to provoke North 
Vietnam into responses justifying U.S. punitive actions. 
They were also 
believed to make possible the postponement "probably until November or 
December" of a decision regarding the more seri ous escalation . 
In 
McNaughton ' s terminology the latter were r eferred to as "a Crescendo of 
GVN-U. S. military actions against the DRV) " but they i ncluded a vari ety 
of possibilities : 
"The escalating actions might be naval pressures 
or mining of harborsj or they might be made up of air 
strill:es against North Vietnam moving from southern to 
northern targets ) from targets associated with infiltration 
and by-then-disclosed DRV- VC radio com~and nets to targets 
of mi litary then industrial importance) and from missions 
which could be handled by the VNAF alone to those .... rhich 
could be carried out only by the U. S." 128/ 
It i s clear) however) that what was contemplated was a pattern of gradu-
ally mOLmting pressures intended to impress the DRV with the increasing 
gravity of its situation . 
Records of the September conference do not indicate that a 
decision was made relative to an explicit January contingency date . 
In 
.several respects they do make clear that the possibility of escalation 
at the end of the' year .... ras considered . 
For example) hope was expressed 
that the GVN would grOl-r stronger over the following two to three months 
by implication) strong enough to permit "major deliberate risks of 
escalation" or "deliberately provocative " U. S. actions . 129/ 
Directly 
r elated to this hope was the intention of having the GVN admit publicly 
to its conduct of maritime operations against North Vietnamese coastal 
insta11ations and communications . 
The aim Ylas "to justify and legitimize 
them on the basis of the facts of VC infi1tration by sea ." 130/ 
It \-las 
believed that this step would be useful in establishing a climate of 
opinion more receptive to expanded (air ) operations against North Vi etnam 
when they should become necessary . 131/ 
Reservations . 
By October 1961f) therefore) there vTaS a genera1 
beli ef among the President ' s top advisors that it would probably be 
necessary eventually to subject North Vietnam to overt military pressure . 
Many .... rere convinced) hOI-rever reluctantly). thl.t it would not be possible 
to obtain an effective solution to the problem of DRV sponsorship of the 
insurgency in South Vietnam or a permanent solution to the political strife -
in laos vTithout such direct pressure on the instigator of these problems . 
Significantly) these views were dissimilar in character to the interest 
in graduated pressures shOim in the Spring and to the determination "to 
use force if necessary" urged on the Pres j.dent at the end of May . 
For 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
most of the principal advisors, the earlier views had been cl early 
contingent upon a major reversal--principally in Laos--and had been 
advanced Hith the apparent assumption that military act i ons hopef~y 
would not be required . 
Nmr, however , the i r views ver e advanced" wi th 
a sense that sl:ch actions were inevitable . 
lVloreover, they were advanced 
despite the perspective afforded by a number of cri t i cal eval uat i ons of 
t he use of military pressure . 
In addi t i on to the studies made dur i ng 
t he f i rst half of 1964, all of the principal advisory agencies had revieved 
a detailed critique of the so- called IIRostovr thesis " j ust pri or to the 
September strategy conference . 
The cr itique was accompl ished in OSD/ISA "rith i nputs and coordi na-
t ion from State rs Policy Planning Council . 
The assigned task was to make 
"a t horough anal ysis of and report on the Rostm-r thesis that covert 
aggression justifies and must be fought by attacks on the source of t he 
aggression ." Copies were distributed to the Washington rec i pients of the 
Rostow paper, i ncluding the Whi te House, Department of State, Department 
of Defense, the JCS and each of t he services . 
In thei r summary analysis of the thes i s the critiquer s emphasi zed 
t wo vari ables Ivhich would determine its utility : 
(1) the extent of the 
comrai tment of the nation furnishing external support and (2 ) the extent 
to which the insurgency affected vital U. S . i nterests . 
With r egard to 
t he former variable, they described "three fundamental condit i ons" "rhich 
would have to exist to achieve success "in cases where the external opponent 
i s committed to the extent of the North Vietnamese ." The opponents lvould 
have to be persuaded that : 
(1) the United States "TaS "taki ng limited 
acti ons to achieve limi ted ob j ectives; " (2 ) "the commitment of the mili tary 
p m-rer of the United States to the limited objective i s a total commitment - -
a s total as our commitment to get the missiles out of Cuba i n October 1962;" 
(3) the United States has "established a suffi cient consensus to see 
t hrough this course of action both at home and on the worl d scene . " 
Fur-
t her, unl ess such an opponent were so persuaded, "the approach might wel l 
f ail to be effective short of a major U. S. military i nvolvement ." 132/ 
Essential to creating the necessary conviction of U. S . i ntent 
on the part of the oppos i ng govermnent, the anal ys i s argued, vas a finn 
image that the President and the U. S . public "rere i n agreement that vi tal 
national interests Ivere at stake . 
Unless vital i nterests "rere clearly 
at st ake, 
tithe Ih"'lited military actions envisaged would 
not onl y involve much greater political costs at home and 
abroaC1 .... but there would be m11ch grc:ater r isk that the 
progral'll Iwuld not be effective except at high levels of 
i nvolvement and risk, and that i t might be al lowed to fa 11 
s hort of such levels ." 
In the analysts t vie1.'T; "this requirement of vital. i nterest "Tould sharpl y 
l imit the applicat ion of the thesis " among the "TOrl o. areas currently 
threatened . 
It observed that "Laos-VietnGm seems the only one in \-Thicl! 
a strong, l;mt not necessarily conclusiVe, cas e can be made that this 
condition holds ." 133/ 
, 35 
TOP SECRET -· Sensitive 
.r"' rt 
• .J ( 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Assuming that vital U.S. interests I'Tere assessed as being 
at stake by an Administration in some unspecified case) the cr~tiquers 
went on to outline some additional "conditions for success ." First, 
an Administratlon would have to present a sO~.id case to the U.S. 
Congress and public and to our allies that the external support pro-
vided by the target nation was instrumental i n sustaining the insurgency . 
In the interest of making its public case conclusive) "the U. S. would 
have to be prepared to expose intelligence data ." Second) it would have 
to identify enemy targets "such that limited attacks and the threat of 
further attacks would bring great pressure on him to comply ." Third) 
t he U. S. Government would have to be able to communicate its case to 
the target nation "including the high degree of U.S. commitment and the 
l imited nature of our objective. " 
This ,vould i nvolve controlling both 
the U.S. and its ally ! s actions "to convey limited objectives) minimizing 
incentives to comply ." Finally) it would have to be capable of deter-
mining enemy compliance with our demands . 134/ 
The critiquers ! analysis included an assessment of the costs 
and risks to be incurred in applying the thesis and cautioned against 
its adoption as a general declaratory policy: 
"Given present attitudes) application of the 
RostOlv approach risks domestic and international opposi-
tion ranging from anxiety and protest to condemnation) 
efforts to disassociate from U.S. policies or alliances) 
or even strong cOlli~t e rm easures . ... 
IICurrently) then) it i s the RostOlv approach) rather 
than the measures it counters that would be seen generally 
as an "unstabilizing" change in the rules of the game) an 
escalation of conflict) an increasing of shared) interna-
tional risks) and quite possibly) as an open aggression 
demanding conderrLDation ... particularly in general terms or 
i n abstraction from a specific) lloc~ediately challenging 
situation . 
"On the other hand) the controlled) limited mili-
tary actions implied in the RostovT approach vTould be far 
more acceptable to the extent that they Ivere seen to 
follOl-T from Presidential conviction of vital national 
necessity in a specific context) and even more to the 
extent that this conviction vrere shared by Congress and the 
U. S •. :;rublic. 
"An attempt to l egitimize such actions in general 
t erms) and in advance of an emergency situation) would 
not only be likely to fail ) but. might well evoke public 
expressions of domestic and allied oPPQs.it i on and denunci-
ations ) vlarnings) counterthreats and binding commitments 
36 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
from opponents that would make it much more difficult 
for the President to contemplate this approach when 
an occasion actually arose .... " 
They went on to point out that accepting the ROStOI-T thesis as a principle 
of U. S. declaratory policy would require making it public before applying 
it. The need to be assured of "Congressj.onal and other public support 
in carrying through the thesis in a given case" would require this. 
Therefore ) the analysts concluded) "It would be exceedingly unwise to 
make the Rostow thesis a declaratory policy unless the U. S. were prepared 
to act on it" - - but then only if we were assured of the public commit-
ment and the capability to achieve success . 135/ 
With regard to the applicability of the thesis to the contemporary 
situation in Southeast Asia) the critiquers summarized their viel{s as 
follows : 
" ... the situation in Vietnam and laos is the only 
one in I-lhich a strong case can be made that the two major 
indications for the Rostow approach are made: 
the ineffective-
ness of alternatives and vital U.S. interests . 
Even in this 
case the degee of UoS . interest) the degree and acceptability 
of the risks) and the potential effectiveness of this approach 
are subject to question. 
In particular) the likelihood and 
the political costs of failure of the approach) and the 
Eressures for U.S. escalation if early moves should fail) 
require serious examination ." 136/ 
Dll'FERING AGENCY POLICY vm.,rs 
In describing the evolution of Administration strategy this account 
has previously emphasized the points of general agreement among the 
President ' s advisors . 
Its purpose has been to describe the existence and 
sense of a policy consensus that had emerged by mid-October . 
Hmvever) 
signlflcant differences of opinion existed among the various advisory 
agencies regarding ,vhat actions should be taken and how soon they should 
be initiated . 
Thesedifferences can be discerned I-Jith respect to five 
issues : 
(1) whether and how soon the GVN maritime operations should be 
acknowledged; (2) the desirability of tit-for-tat reprisals; (3) how 
best to cope with enemy reactions to increased pressures on the DRV; 
(4) the degree of GVN/U.S. readiness required before increasing the 
pressures; and .( 5) the relationship perceived between increased pressures 
and negotiatiors . 
JCS vie';.Ts . 
Senior military officials differed among themselves 
on the first three issues . 
CINCPAC apparently perceived difficulties 
resulting from official acknmvledgements of GVN maritime operations and 
suggested that press leaks would achieve the desired effects on SVN morale . 
General ifueeler saw official acknmTledgement as a means to legitii11ize the 
37 
TOP SECREr - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
operations and thereby enable their scope and effectiveness to be 
increased. 
However) he was not supported by the service chiefs . 
They 
opposed surfacing the GVN operations until they could become associated 
with the DE SOTO Patrols "or until the United States is prepared openly 
to support MAROPS militarily . " 137/ 
All of these officials agreed that 
it was necessary to undertake reprisals for a variety of hostile VC or 
DRV actions . 
In particular they wanted U.S . responses to be greater 
in degree) not necessarily matching in kind) than the provocations . 
Where they came to differ was on the desirability of deliberately pro-
voking DRV actions to which we could then respond . 
After the September 
White House meeting only the Air Force Chief of Staff and the Marine 
Commandant favored this approach . 138/ 
Differences "Tith respect to preparation for coping with enemy 
reactions to harsher pressures centered around the i ssue of cow~itting 
greater numbers of U.S. ground forces to South Vietnam . 
CINCPAC) sup-
porting General Westmoreland's request) urged provision for deployment 
of Marine and Army units to provide security for U.S. /GVN operating 
bases . 
The JCS disagreed and disapproved a request to make such adjust-
ments in OPLAN 37-64) on grounds that since VC capabilities were still 
questionable it was preferable not to precommit U.S. forces in the manner 
urged. 
At i ssue concurrently was an Air Force proposal to reduce the 
number of ground forces provided for in the event of a large scaie DRV/ 
CHICOM intervention in Southeast Asia and to rely more heavily on tactical 
air capabilities . 
The other chiefs disagreed) but the controversy con-
cerning the relative emphasis on ground and air forces for the defense of 
Southeast Asia was to occupy JCS attention for several months to come . 139/ 
Regarding the issue of readiness to increase pressures on North 
Vietnam and the role of negotiations) the military chiefs were in agree-
ment throughout the period . 
Soon after the Tonkin Gulf i ncidents they 
urged prompt implementation of more serious pressures using U.S. air 
capabilities . 
They opposed B-57 training for the VNAF) citing its limited 
pilot and supporting technical resources which would be needed for counter-
insurgency missions. 
In response to Harnings that we should not get 
deeply involved in a conflict in Southeast Asia until we were surer of 
the GVN's commitment) they replied that "the United States i s already 
deeply involved ." They went on to recommend preparations for deploying 
the remaining OPLAN 37-64 forces needed for mounting a U.S. air strike 
program against North Vietnam . 140/ 
While the JCS did not address the 
subject of negotiations explicitly during this period) their statements 
implied a l ack of interest j.n a negotiated solution to the Vietnam prob-
l em . 
At every opportunity· they reiterated their recommendation that .. Ie 
should attack North Vietnamese will and capabilities as necessary to 
force a DRV deciSion to halt its support and direction of the insurgency . 
~'OP SECREI' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Saigon Embassy views . 
Ambassador Taylor opposed the views 
of his former military colleagues on most issues . 
Prior to the Sep-
tember meeting) he expressed objections to the idea of surfacing or 
leaking to the press the nature of GVN maritime operations . 
He also 
opposed tit-fo:"-tat retaliation bombing for "the reason that it was 
IIlikely to release a new order of military reaction from both sides) 
the outcome of which is impossible to predict . II 
He saw enemy ground 
assaults as a greater threat to U.S. bases in South Vietnam than enemy 
air attacks and supported the deployment of U. S. ground force units 
for base security purposes . 
This was to occur after the beginning of 
GVN/U.S. ground and air cross-border operations into Laos . 
However, 
not unlike the Chiefs ) one of the criteria he employed in shaping his 
recommendation vTas the avoidance of a major U.S. ground force commit-
ment . 141/ 
Ambassador Taylor's views were apparently based on an under-
lying rationale that actions to counter the VC/ DRV aggression should not 
outstrip the GVN and that if it could be avoided, the conflict should not 
be escalated to a level beyond South Vietnamese capacities to manage it . 
Although believing firmly that the Unit ed States would have to apply 
direct pressur e against North Vietnam eventually) to force her to 
abandon her objectives) he felt that the major burden of this effort 
should be borne by the GVN. 
Thus) his support for U.S. base security 
deployments was based in part on concern l est ARVN QDits be tied down 
in such roles and) thus) unavailable for more free- ranging combat. 
Simi-
larly, in August) the Embassy favored immediate initiation of B-57 
·training for the VNAF to enable it to play a substantial role in the 
overt air attacks envisioned for 1965 . 
This training - - like Saigon ' s discouragement of U. S. eagerness 
to negotiate in Laos -- was also advocated for its value in bolstering 
the GVN's morale and determination to continue fighting against its 
communist enemi es . 
This same consideration was at the root of the 
Ambassador ' s belief that any negotiations which affected South Vietnam 
should be avoided until North Vietnam was subjected to more forc eful 
military pressures . 
He also felt that commQDication with Hanoi should 
be preceded by a thorough discussion and understanding of our limited 
war aims with the GVN. 1~.2/ 
The Ambassador ' s basic concern that the GVN be capable of 
and committed to supporting the evolving l evels of \wr effort against 
the commQDists Has indicated in his r esponse to the political upheaval 
in Saigon. 
Earlier) his recowmendations had included the option of 
opening lithe fji!.l campaign against the DRV vTithout delay, II in the event 
of threatened collapse of the Kha~D Government . 
The objective was to 
have been lito avoid- the ·possible consequences of a collapse of national 
morale·. II 
At the September meeting and subsequently) hOl·rever) after 
. Kha~D had already been forced to step dOlm from GVN l eadership once 
and his neH government Has even shakier than two months earlier) the 
Pmbassador opposed overt action against North Vietnam as too risky and 
urged instead that further measures t o strengthen the GVN be taken first . ll} 3/ 
39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
,OSD views . 
OSD and OSD/ISA views "rere clearer on some 
i ssues than on others . 
For example) the source documents indicate 
their consistent support for surfacing the GVN maritime operations . 144/ 
Similarly) it is clear that OSD continually regarded negotiations as-a-
necessary process for terminating the insurgency in South Vietnam and 
a program of increased pressures against the DRV as a means of improving 
the U. S. bargaining position . 
Like other agencies) it saw negotiations 
as something that should not be entered into until the pressures were 
hurting North Vietnam) but it emphasized that the pattern of pressures 
should make clear our limited aims . 145/ 
' 
, 
Equally consistent but less explicit were OSD views on GVN/ U. S. 
readiness to mOQDt overt attacks on North Vietnam. 
Secretary McNamara 
was concerned that too early initiation of air action against North 
Vietnam might find the Unit ed States unprepared to cope with the con-
sequences . 
At the end of August he directed the JCS to study and report 
on POL and ordnance stocks available to carry out approved contingency 
plans to combat a large-scale communist intervention after the expenditures 
required for the pattern of attacks which they proposed against North 
Vietnam. 
He also asked for specific recommendations on next steps to be 
taken in the event destruction of the proposed JCS targets did not destroy 
the DRV will and capability to continue . 
Mr . McNaughton ' s "Plan of Action" 
was intended to make unnecessary any decision concerning larger operations 
until l ate in the autu1lll1. 
Moreover) it was designed explicitly "to create 
as little risk as possible of the kind of military action which would be 
difficult to justify to the American public and to preserve where possible 
the option to have no U.S. military action at all. " 
In September) OSD/ ISA 
was on record as favoring the initiation of bombing against North Vietnam 
after suitable provocation by Hanoi . 
But by mid-October the OSD view 
was apparently that overt actions against the North should be held off 
at least until the ne\ol year. 146/ 
With respect to the other i ssues the most consistent aspect of 
OSD view's \olas their prudence . 
Its attitudes tmrard tit -for-tat reprisals 
are not really clear. 
Soon after Tonkin Gulf OSD notified the JCS that 
the events ther e precluded any further need for their \olork on retaliation 
scenarios in support of NSAM 288 . 
Then) just three \oleeks later) the 
McNaughton "Plan of Action" proposed deliberate provocation of DRV actions 
to permit U.S . retaliation - - but as a means to begin a gradual squeeze 
on North Vietnam) not merely tit-for-tat reprisals . 
Mr . McNamara ' s own 
vieHs do not appear except by implication) in that he did not indicate 
any opposition to them I-Then shmrn William Bundy ' s draft summation of the 
September meet.ing consensus . 
11.~1 / 
Prudence vras again the dominant feature 
of OSD vie,·rs on preparations to cope with possible enemy reactions to the 
harsher pressures . 
For example) lion several occasions " Secretary McNamara 
expressed to the JCS his interest in the possibility of countering a 
massive Chinese interventi on in Southeast Asia \olithout the need to intro-
duce large numbers of U.S . ground forces . 
The OSD appraisal of the USAF 
40 
TOP SECREr - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
proposal to reduce provisional ground force levels for Southeast 
Asian defense concluded that the i ssue remained "open ." It was crit-
ical of that particular study because of its methodology and aspump-
tions. 
Later) however) Mr. McNamara supported the JCS in their 
disapproval of the ~ACV request for allocaticn of additional ground 
force units for base security purposes . 148/ 
State views. 
Various documents make it clear that there \-Tere 
several different points of view prevalent i-rithin the State Department 
during the period in question . 
Reflected here are those channeled 
through the Secretary of State or communicated to the Department of 
Defense) usually through the Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs . 
With few exceptions, the courses of action followed by the Administration 
were those advocated by State. 
Its proposal for B- 57 training for the 
VNAF was apparently overruled on the basis of JCS recommendations) but 
otherwise its support for measures to further strengthen the GVN and for 
pressuring actions other than overt military attacks throughout 1964 
prevailed . 149/ 
Its support for the ack..l101dedgement of GVN maritime 
operations failed to materialize only because of objections on the part 
of the GVN itself . 150/ 
State Department vie,·rs on the other issues) likewise) were 
reflected in U.S. policy positions . 
Reprisals for VC acts that could 
be matched i-rith fitting responses were favored in principle but ,·rere not 
necessarily to be carried out in all instances . 
Escalation through such 
r esponses ,-laS seen as useful for purposes of assisting GVN morale) but 
State did not believe that steps should be taken to bring about such 
situations just yet . 
It did) however) acknoHledge that deliberate 
provocations might be useful in the future . 
Negotiation of a Vietnam 
solution through an international conference IoTas vielved as inevitable, 
but it should be permitted only after hurti ng North Vietnam and convincing 
South Vietnam of U. S. resolve to achieve its objectives . 
Moreover) 
Secretary Rusk) Assistant Secretary BQl1dy and Counselor Rostow were each 
knmm to view avoidance of a commitment of U. S. ground forces to Southeast 
Asia as an important element in policy . 151/ 
CIA views . 
With the exception of Mr . McCone ' s oplnlons rendered 
in the September strategy meeting) available CIA documents provide no 
policy recow~endations. However) they do contain assessments bearing 
directly on the policy i ssues discussed previously -- particularly \-Tith 
respect to enemy reactions to the measures contemplated . 
For example) 
intelligence estimates indicated little likelihood that intensified 
maritime operations ,{Quld result in retaliation against GVN naval bases . 
Similarly) the~r predicted fel-T serious conseq'lences in response to U. S. 
limited tit-for-tat reprisal strikes . 
Rather) the CIA believed that 
. communist responses I'Tould be liInited to' defensive measures) increased 
propaganda) and additional logistical assistance from China . 
In the 
event our reprisal actions I·rere "heavier and sustained) " the DRV "Tas 
expected first to attempt to dissuade the United States through inter-
national political moves) apparent concessions) and efforts to underline 
communist solidarity and determination . 
They would probably also curb 
the VC from making nei-T provocative attacks "and might direct them to 
reduce temporarily the tempo and' size of their attacks." 152/ 
41 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
CIA estimates of commQnist reaction to systematic U. S./GVN 
air attacks on North Vietnam were less certain . 
While acknowledging 
"substantial danger" that the DRV might decide to send its own armed 
forc es on a large scale to Laos and South Vietnam) 
("Hanoi might assume that United States would 
be unwilling to undertake a major ground war) or that 
if it was ) it could ultimately be defeated by the 
methods which were successfu~ against the French.") 
they thought it more likely that Hanoi would choose a more conservative 
course . 
They reasoned that "the DRV might calculate that it would be 
bet~ e~ ~o stop VC activity temporarily than risk loss of its military 
facllltles and i ndustry " but that they VTould make no meaningful con-
:es~ions "such as agreeing to effective international inspection of 
ln~lltra~ion routes. " 153/ 
In any event) the CIA di d not believe that 
Chlnese mtervention was likely unless the United States should stri ke 
the Chinese mainland or unless U. S./GVN forces should attempt to "occupy 
~r e~s of the DRV or communist-held territory in Northern Laos ." 154/ 
It 
mdlcated that both North Vietnam and Co:m..llluni st China wished to avoid 
direct conflict with the United States and ",ould probably "avoid actions 
t hat would in their view unduly increase the chances of a major U.S. 
response" against them . 
. 
Rather than outright military victory in South Vietnam) CIA 
estlIDates indicated belief that the communists expected to gain control 
through a "neutrali st coalition government dominated by pro-Communist 
elements" that 'I-lOuld come about "soon ." This concern over the threat of 
neutralism had been voiced at the September meeting by Mr . McCone and 
was quite prevalent among i ntelligence discussions of the period . 
Alto-
gethe~ ) it created a rather gloomy impression of GVN readiness to support 
sustalned overt operations against North Vietnam and absorb likely VC 
c ounte~easures . 
In October the picture became even gloomier as a result 
of an lntelligence assessment "'hich described continuing deterioration 
of the South Vietnamese political situation and predicted even more: 
" ... ve believe that the conditi ons favor a further 
decay of GVN will and effectiveness . 
The likely pattern 
of this decay viII be increasing defeatism) paralysis of 
leadership) friction with Americans) exploration of possible 
lines of political accomm.odation 'I"ith the other side) and 
a general petering out of the war effort ." 155/ 
42 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
:{' 
., 
. ~-
' 
. ' 
',' 
0
' 
., 
, . 
~ : '. 
. -< ~ 
.-:. 
: . ,-
'. :. 
' . ' 
'-" 
.~ ',.. -
": 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
, . 
25 May 1964 
DRAFT RESOLUTION 00: SOUTHEAST ASIA 
-----_._-----------------_.-
-. 
Whereas the signatories of the Geneva Accords of 1954, 
including the Soviet Union, · the Communist regime in China,· 
and Viet Nam agreed to respect the independence an'd terri-
torial integrity of South Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia ; ahd 
the United St.ates , although not a signatory of the Accords, 
declared that it would view any renewal of aggression in 
violation of the Accord~ with grave concern and as seriously 
. threatening internationaJ. peace and security; 
\'lhereas the CorrIJlmist regime in North. Viet N£lm, \·:ith 
the aid and supporto£ the COITh,"lmist regime in China , has 
systematically flouted its obligations under these Accords 
and has enga~ed in a~zression aqainst the independeGce and 
~ ~ 
~~ 
~ 
territoJ~ial integrity of South Viet Nam by carrying out a 
systematic plan for the subversioh of the Government of 
Sout.h VietNam, by hll~n:i.shing direction, training, personnel 
and arms for the conduct of guerrilla warfare within South 
Viet Narn, and by the ruthless Dse of terror ag~inst the 
peaceful popu1.ation of that countr;; 
TOP SECRET 
, . 
. ', 
. -, '" . ... 
~ - .. '. . ., 
~ . ...... . 
. .:. - . - . 
. i . . 
J/ 
L ~, 
- . 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
.. 
-. 
TOP SECRET 
o
. 
- ' 
Hhereas in the face of this Corn.t111..ll1ist aggl:°ession and 
• 
. 
. 
subversion the Government and p~ople of South Viet Nam have 
. brc:8vely '111c1er·t.."'al'e-n .L-L.h· e do f:"nse 
oJ:: the1" r 1" Tlo1°Dendel1ce and 
o 
~ 
, 
~J.<-. ~ 
J. 
1. 
~'.. 
L 
L 
t~rritoLi.al integrity, and at the request of that Government 
. the United States has 
in accordance "\·]ith its Declaration of 
. 
. 
, 
1954, provided military advice, economic aid and military 
eq"i..iiptnent; 
rynereas 1" 
th 
G 
• 
- ts of lq62 the Url1"ted 
~ 
-
n 
e 
eneva agreernen 
~, 
States , the Soviet Union~ the Communist regime in China, 
North Viet Nam and others solemnly undertook to respect the 
soverei.gnty, independence, neutrality, unity and' territorial 
integrity of the Kingdom of Laos; 
Hhereas in violation of these uncLc~rtakings the Communist 
regime in North Viet Nam) with the aid and support of the 
COmf~l1...mist regioe in China , has engaged in aggression against 
- the independence, unity.and territorial integ::ity o£: Laos by 
" 
.L-
"" 
J:: 
" "  
'--
, 
th 
r:: th 
.L-
ma1nLaln~ng J.orces on Laotlan terrlLory, oy 
e use oj. 
a L 
territory for the infiltration of arms and equipQ2nt into 
South . Viet 1'\:: III , and by providing dil-ection, men and equipr.1cnt 
for persi~tent armed attacks against the Covernment of 
, . ", 
--
. .. :, 
, ... ~ 
~ .- . 
.. 
. 0' . - National Unification of the Kingdom of Laos; 
. . 
~ . 
, . 
.. :. 
" 
,',
. 
- -
'. 
• 
I ' 
: 
i • 
I. 
. ' 
.
'
. 
.
:. 
'. ,. ,' 
':" '. 
' ..... 
. .' . 
~ . , .. ' .... 1: .... . " 
-' . 
'. ,. '. 
' . .' 
. 
: 
t. 
.: . i 
.' 
, 
, .;, 
': .' 
. '-
'" " .... ':.: "1'0")' 
· C~Cl~~I.-' 
. ' ... . 
. 
'
. 
.t 
UJ.J 
_ .•. ..} J. 
'.: .' .' . 
. .. ---......-_. __ ._-_ .. -- -
. :" 
. -' . 
. 
' '- j 
• '-:- • •• : 
-. 
• .' 
"
~ : . ,. - • r 
--
. --
-
•• •• t 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
3 
ltnereas in the face of this Communist aggression the 
Government of National Unification and the non-CoIlliJt.mist 
. 
. 
elements in Laos have striven to maintain the conditions 
.c 
" 
• 
1 
1 
1 
lJ 
.. 
d f 
,. 
OJ.. unlcy, lTlOepencence anc 
~1eutra lty enVJ_SlOne 
-or tneJ_r 
coutitry in the Geneva Agreements of 1962; 
. 
0 
Whereas the United States 'has no territorial, military 
or po~itical ambitions in Southeast Asia~ bu~ desires only 
that the peoples of SOt.'.th Viet Nan, 1,aos and Cambodia 
should be left in peace by their neighbors to work out their 
m·m destinies in thei~· mm \'lay , end, therefore, 
i~_s objective 
is that the status established for these countries in the 
·GenevaAccords of 1954 and the Geneva Agreements of 1962 
should be restored with effective means of enforceDent; 
Whereas it is esse.ntial that the v:orld fully underst2.nd 
that the An12rican people are united in their determination to 
take all steps that ffiay be necessary to assist the peoples 
of South Vie~L ~ 
d L 
l'i art! a n 
a 0 s to ma intain their independence 
and political integrity. 
Nm·] , the:::efore) be it resolved by the Senate and House 
of Representatives of the U;:lited States of America in COTl2reSS 
~ 
assen:bled : 
." : 
. 
' .. " 
That 
. , " ". 
~" 
~ . . . 
. 
~
.
' 
.-
. ,
" 
•
•• f 
,"." 
0" i':: 
. ; . . ' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
. ; 
'. 
That the United States regards the preservation of 
the independence and integrity of the nations of South Viet 
Nam and Laos as vital to its riatidnjl interest and to world 
peace ; 
Sec. 2. 
To t~is end) if the President determines the 
necessity thereof) the United States is prepared, upon the 
request of the Government of SOL-1th Viet Nam. or the Govern-
ment of Laos , to use all measul:'es ) inch,ding the corn 
... n.d.tment 
of armed .forces to assist that government in the defense of 
'. 
~ts independence and territorial integrity against aggression 
or subversion supported , controlled or directed from any 
. COIT.:nunist c ount ry , 
Se.c. 3. 
( a) 
The President is hereby authorized to 
use for assistance under this joint resolution not to ex-
cec: c1 $ __ .. __ ~_ dUl~ ing the fiscal year 196f~ , and not to 
exceed $ 
durlna the fiscal year 1965) from ~ny ap-
--_____ 
c 
for carrying out the provisions 
of t~1e :Fore;i.gn Assistance .Act of 1961) as aEler.ded, in ac-
' . 
. , ' 
\ .] l e[l the provisio['.s of that .t;.c t ) 
in this joi.nt resolution • 
This authorization 
, i 
, 
: .
. :. 
. " . 
: . 
:,.:"" . . ': . .' . 
. is in 
", .. 
" 
' . 
. . '. 
.. ...~. . ~ . 
',:: ,," : >;: " " ,,:,,- , 'l'0 P St: (~:(;S'J~
' 
.:', ' . 
. .. :' 
, 
' 
_ ___ --O. ___ .~ _ __ ~_ 
, .~ _ _ 
'
. 
: 
I . ,' 
' 
" 
. 
,;, . . . 
" 
.. ' 
'. 
' 
, 
. . 
'. " 
, ' ' 
~" , 
' 
"
" 
.' 
", : 
; 
,:. ,' , 
~ .' I.' 
. .... .
,~ •. 
' . 
. " , 
'. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
~l::';;' 
V\ 
5 
.. / 
.' 
. jc in a~'d~hl'OI1 to oL'lc r e ~s~l'na al_1LL'1~orl'zc~LLl'Ol~S ''i~l'th respec'L-
. .,. 
'-' 
L L. 
L [ 
~. 
.XJ. 
L. 
0 
• 
Ol 
l 
V 
to the use of ~uch appropriaiion~. 
(b) 
Obligations .inc~rred in carrying cut the pro-
. visions of this joint resolution may be paid eith~r out of 
appropriations for military ~ssistance or appropl~iations 
for other than milit~ry assistance,. except that 2ppropria~ 
tions made available for Titles I, III, and VI of Chapte~ 2, 
Pc::Jr'L' I, orr: t'ne 
l~'oJ_-el' Q:n
' 
. 
.!-
• 
,. 
. 
F~ S S l S L- 21.1 C e P. c L-
v 
of :1961, as amended, 
shall not be aV2i12~12 ~o~ payment of such obligations. 
(c) 
Notwithsta~ding any other provisi~n of the 
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, when the Presi-
dent deteri1~ines it to be important to the.. security of tl-:e 
United ' States and in hlrtherance of the purposes of this 
joint resolution, he may Ci'-lthorize the use of up to $ ____ _ 
. of funds available. under subsection Ca) in each of the fisc2.1 
. . 
years 1964 and 1965 under the authority of section 614(a) of 
the Foreign Assista~ce Act of 1961, as amended, and is 
authorized to use up to $ ____ _ 
of such funds in each 
SllCh year pursuant to his certification that i.t is in3dvis ·ab~.~ 
to s})ecify the nzture of the use of such funds, 'i\,hich cer~ifi.-
cation shaJ.l be dee22d to be a sufficient voucher for such 
2P.WU~!ts . 
' . . 
~ . . 
" TO? SECRE'l 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
-. 
. .. -- . :. 
\ 
'. 
' . .. 
< . 
. .1 
. 
o
. 
' .' 
. ~ '. . . 
·TOP 
6 
.(d) 
Upon determinatio~ by the head of any agency 
. , 
personnel available 
..... ' 
Ok. 
,.. 
...... 
6?7 
au~norlLy or seCLlon 
_ 
'. 
of the Foreig::>. AsS]_st:allc2 Act of 1961, as amended, . or C:::he;:--
.! 
, .  
't 
• 
. 
. 
, . . .  .J-
d' 
. 
w~se UDGer ~nat Ac~, for purposes or aSSlSLance u~ er t01S 
joint resolution, any officer or e~?loyee so made available 
'm~y be 
p_··-,OV-l·,C'!~('! co ~e 
...... 
~o' 
'-'-
<:: 
. 
Hi}' nsaL.10!."l 
2~~
' allowances a~ rates other 
than those provided by tte Foreig~ Service Act of 1946, as 
amencled, 'the Career C02?2nsation Act of 1949, as aoendeci, 
and the Overs~as Differend_als ' and Allm-72i.:ces Act_ to the ex-
te,1:.t nece.ss2ry to C2!::':CY out t~2 purposes of this' joint 
resolution. 
The President shall pr~scrib2 regulations 
be provided. 
In addition, the President may utilize such 
provisions of the Forei~n Service Act:of 1946, as amended, 
..... 
cis he 'def~f!~S' a~ptopriate to apply to ;per.sonne1 of any agency 
carrying out functions 
resoluti.ono 
' " 
' . 
. ", 
.. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
-. 
3 
In any en·nt, tlle illtere;;t of the Committee is not in :l di;;cuso:ion of the st:lff 
study, lJut ill your tbtimouy of August 6, I!JG4, and ' _\ll1b:I :;~nclo r St e\"en~on'" 
statement to tb ~ 'Cnited :\at ions of August::; in light of a:1Y information your 
oflice may hr,ye aClluired since the illcidellts in the Gulf of Tonkin. 
. 
1'herefore, in tl.te interest oE a thorough c1iscus;:;ion 011 February 20, the Com-
mittee will ll1:lke a '.':lil:lble to yo'ur otJice a copy of the trallscript of the tcsti-
mony of August 6, l!JCrl. (c\rubassador Stevenson's r,resentntion is, of cour.-e, a 
matter of l>ublic record.) I n'oulc1 bope that you II'ill be :lble to redell' this 
transcript and lJring the Committee up to date on \\'h:lt II'e now ];:non- of tlw 
inCident:; in thc Gulf of Tonkiu. 1'lte COlllmittee is p:1l'ticulnrly interested in c1b-
cussing what l e~;>o ni han, becn lea rned about the problems of an:llp:ing . in-
formati on in thf.' Illi(~~t of 11 cri::;is Si[U;1tioll. 
. 
Filltlll;.-, ' n~ I mentioned t:J you c111rin~ our cOI1l'croation, I II'ouId like to :'eilE'\\' 
D1~-
requE'~t of .Janna ry 8th tha t thc Departmcnt of Defense prol'idc tlt~ COlll-
llilttl.'e at the earli e~t pns",il.Jle date with a. report done by the Weapons ::;rdem 
P,"aluation Group on the snbjf.'ct "Command and Control of the Tonkin Gulf 
Incident. 4-;) -·\.ll~n ::;t 10G-1." 
I look f Ol'\I':ln1 to secing you 011 Fcl.Jruary 20. 
SinCf.'rely yonrs, 
J . ,Yo FULBI:IGflT, Chairlilall. 
The CHAIIDIAX. ~1r: Secre'tary, my O\,,-Y,1. "ie\\' is that this statement 
o~ yours sho~llclnot be made public llll~il after the commit\ee ha,s ha.d 
all OppOrtwllty to " '0 throu£:h the he.al'lIlO·s, and also to deCIde mlat It 
does ,about its omtstaif rel)Ol't and the l~arings. Thi.s is an execllt~\'e 
nwetlllg: ,mel I hope that you will be ,\'il1ing to retam that. ~ realrze 
there ,oll be pressures upon you, as there ~1l'e ~lp~:m the C0I11lnlttee, for 
release of (hese documents, but I wou1d t hlllk It IS prematu re to do so. 
STATEl'iIEl'TT OF RON. ROBERT S. McNA?iIARA, SECRETARY OF 
DEFENSE; ACCOI>IPANIED BY GEl'!. EARLE G. \VHEELER, CHAIR-
MAN OF THE JOINT C1UErS OF STAFF, AND CAPT. II. B. SV.JEITZER, 
U.S. NAVY, IvIIlITARY ASSISTANT TO THE CHAIR:r;IAN, JOINT 
CHIEFS OF STAFF 
Secretary :JIo~_DL\nA. ~Ir. Chairman, I ,-ery Dluch appre cia~e 'y?lll' 
personal klllc1 WIshes and compl iments. It has ?cen it !,10St sa tlsfYll1g 
I years to me, made more so by the courtesy WIth whICh I ha,'e been 
treated by this committee on nlY nlllnerom occasions before it. 
. 
I might also say I share T. ·S. EIiofs belief that history may be 
freedom, and I look fon\'ard to the development of our discussions 
here today in it, way that will make it freedom and not servitude . . 
I d.o h~y e a stateillent ""hich I \\-onlcllike to present to the comm.ittee 
at thIS t1lne. I ha \'C not released it to the press. I told my.assocIates 
that w'e shoulc1not do so. lYe h[\,\'e submitted to the comnuttee some 
200 copies o! it so they may release it. I doubt Ycry ml~ch th::lt ""e ,:-il1 
.be H?le to "-lthstand the pressures of th? press today \nthout rele:l~lllg 
It. \\ e ha '-e been deluged by requests for It. 
RELEc\SIXG OF DOCU:,\IEXTS 
Senator ~~oc:SE. Can I only S<lY, .;\11'. Chairman, <?11 it, procedur~11 
matter, I qm·e agree ,,-ith the Secretary. I do not thmk we ought III 
any way to place any restrictions on the Secretary in reg:nd to releas-
ing anythi.Eg he WIlilts to r~lease. I know you dicl.n~t so imp]}.'. But I 
thmk the Jl~dgmE'l~t. of the :)ecrebuy should p~'e\'aIlI~ regard to ,,'hat 
the D~p'1l'tmellt of Dcfen:::e releases, and I th1l1k the Judgment. of the 
committee should pre\'1lil in regard to \\'hat \\'c should release. 
.. ---.-----~--~-.-.------ ---~-
. ............. 
. ... __ ~~ I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
..-------
·--·---- ·-____ 
..: ~ 
........ :.... _
..:. ............. _ .:..~ ••. _ .. _...::..~.,;, _
_
___ 
"
_
·1 ~ 
.• _-~.~ ~:..::... __ 
.. 
4 
The CH.UR=-'UX. The ollIy thing I was suggesting--
Senator MOl~SE . It is in keepin o' ,,·ith the eli nsion of powers doctrine. 
The CI·U.ITI=-'L-l..X. I tholwht it ~'ollId be much fairer if ,ye could ar-
range to release them sill~lt1taneously. For cxample, the staff report 
" woulc1 pi'esent <;mly. one side of the pich!l'e, ~s would the Secl'ebllfs 
statement. I tlllnk It ,,"ould be too bad If tIllS goes out and notll1ng 
else. That is a matter for the committee to determine, I gl'11l1t. 
Senator ::'IIor:sE. I still 'wouldnot want to-I would personally not 
be ~. pal;ty to pla ('.il~~ any !'estr i cti01~ 0!1 the Secret~l'Y . 
. 1he C~L\n:)L\:" J.he pomt I am trylllg.to make 15 that much of the 
InfOrmatIOIl whlch 'ye haye is confidentlal and cannot be released. 
'I~hercas a grcat. many of the documents to which thc Secretary I'ders, 
!"JUt docs not incorporate, are also confidential. I ·would submit that it 
IS a very one-sided picturc to rclease only the statCJ~lent. 
. 
Senator ::'IIonsE. It is onc-sieled only if the COl1l1l1lttCC lea "es It that 
way. 
Thc CU.-\I!O[.\x. I OTant that. But it is only a matter of time. 'Ire 
hay~ not had a chan~e to read the Secreta1'5-~s statement. lYe only 
recen-ed this statement. fill hour ao'o and it is a matter of timing. 
Senator ~1onsE. I understand.'" 
. The CUAIlnux. Docs the Senator object for the committee to ha \'C 
time to considCI· the statemcnt? 
Senator ~IonsE. I ,yould only object as to placing any restrictions on 
the Secretary at all. 
The Cn.-\In=-'L\X. I do not consider it pIncing restrictions. It is [t 
matter for us to alTi\"e at an understanding as to when "i-e do it. 
Senator GORE. ::.\11'. Chairman. 
Thc CIIAIR1L\.X. Yes~ 
S~nator GOHE. Thcre is a qucstion here. "Te .nre h,~ring an executi'<l 
seSSIOn. Could ',"e not defer judo'ment on thIS untIl "-0 han had a 
chance to read it? 
b 
The Cn.:\In=-'L\x. That is "'hat ,\-e 1l0nnaHy do. That is what I was 
suggcsting, until wc recei'-e it; the committee makes up its o\,-n mind 
usually afterward, this afternoon, for example. 
Senator GonE. The point I ,,,as attempting to raise, I find a great 
~leal of appeal in ,,-hat Senator ::'I101's2 has said, but I think it must Le 
mterpretecl ill the }io'ht of the fact-, tlwt we are deali1l2' hero ,,"ith class-
ified materials anct'ha "ing au c~,ecuti ve hearing. 'rhe release of a 
statemont. in executirc 11earino., used in an ('xecutiYC hearing, has not, 
so far as I can recall, been c101~ except by pennissicn of the committee. 
I remember one time ,,-hen I ,,-as chail'lll::1.ll of a subcommittee, S(~c­
retar), Hu.sk ,\"<1S appearing, and the question o~ releasing his st~lt e1l1ellt 
was subnuttec1 to the committee. and the COJl1l111ttee "oted unalll1l101lsh' 
to a~pI'or~ its release. I clare say it might do So-\\~ lllight do so, afte~' 
heal"lng tIllS, but I ,,-onldlike to defer judgment on It. 
The en.urDUX. That is all right. 
Senator ~IonsE . Can I take 30 :::econds morc? I do not ,,-ant to he a 
stickler or m[1ke a tempest in fI. tefl.pot, but I do think, gentlcmen, yon 
are dealing here "ith a procedural matter that you should not set a 
precedent on. I do not think that at allY time a committee of the CO!l-
gress h!'.s the right to call into execntin·session a Cabinet ofrlcer or al1y-
~-------- ---.-----~-~----
7 { 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
5 
one "'ho is really a sl;okesman for the ac1millistrntion and. see);: to im-
pose .any restriction on tha't \\'jtness in regard to r..nythll1g that he 
says 1ll that executiye session in respect to his right to make any cum-
ment after the meetino. is o\'er or release any statement. he wants to 
make aft.or the meetin¥"'is O\'er. 
. 
Spea}\lll~' ~lypothetically, although the SeCl'~tary has lly1.el~ :'ery 
clear Ius \\'~lll1lg11ess to oblige you, I am 110t talklllg .nbout Ius W1111l1g-
ness. to oblIge but I am talkinrr about \\'lwt. I COllsIder to be n very, 
very important. basic procel1i.lr~l right of the administration " 'itness 
~lllder t~e separation po\\'ers doctrine. I ~la\'e nen?r tl'a:lsgressccl upon 
It kno\\'lllgly, and I am not going to let. the ac1ministnltlOn at any t~me 
transgress upon our correspondino' rirrht llllc1cr the same doetrll1p.. 
Therefore, I think \\'e olwht to deal "'ifh each othcl' on the basis that 
';'e know what these resp~cti\'e rights arc and seek to pbce 110 restric-
bon on each other. That is my point. 
. 
I took the same po.:;itioll, you ,,·ill recall, in the :'.IacArthm heanngs 
w~lell there ,,'a:') an. attempt,.in my judgmcn~, <;m th? part. of tJle COlll-
m~ttee then to ll1frlllge the nghts of the aelmml:3tmtlOll under the c1oc-
tnne there. I take tJle same position this mOl'lling. 
Senator HICKEXLOOPEn. ~Ir . Chairman. 
The Cn .. uIDIAx. Senator IIickenlooper. 
RESl'OXSIBILTTY Fon m::LEASIXG .. \ S'L\TE:lfEXT 
:Senator IIIClmxLOoPEn. I think lye haye a rather complicated situ-
at.lOn here which is not necessarily one under the control of the Secre-
tary ~r of the committee. It may be more under the control of the 
COlllI11lttCC than of the Secretary. 
. 
I would say that. the Secretary has no right \'\'hatsoen'.r uncler our 
p.rocedure to release a transcript of this record where members (]nes-
tr~n the Secretary allc1 ans\,ers come in. On the other hand, I would say 
t!ll~,. that th~ reSl?ollsibility of releasing a stn t~n:ent 0!1 the ~o~e re.spot 
slbrllty .o! .tno Secretary or any other admll11stratl\'e officwl IS LlC 
responsIbllI~Y of that of11cial of that departlllent. ~ am. ll?t so sme \\'0 
can control It. ,Ye cnn control ",hat \Te release. I thInk It IS a. matter of 
some kind of an unc1erstanc1in o·. 
. 
I am thoro~lghly sympathetic with \ylwt. you hai'e said, ~Ir. Chair-
man, about pIecemeal releases of these things. I hate to read about 
them ~i'e~ though they han~ not been rele,1secl-I hate to read about 
tl:om 111 TIme magazine or the:X ew York Times or other papers of that 
kll1d, where "'e hnre to O'et some of our information from there. That 
~nakes us quite restless b~t app::trelltly there is nothing we can do about 
It., and sometimes ,,-hat (toes on in this committee at least seems to be 
approximatiye in some ~f those llC'>\'S rele,lses of certain columnists 
and so 011. 
So it is a prohlem that has its vn~'ious facets. But so far as a straight 
. ~tat.Cl~en~ of the Secretary, I would say that we han~ no authority ~o 
I 
mhI~It hIm from a stl'aig11t statement he want.s to !nake to the pubJlc 
I 
on hIS O\,n responsibilit~· ,,'ithout reo·a.rel to qlle;/.lOlls or ans\\'er~ 01' 
I 
what anyone eJse has sa.leI because \,}len that occurs, then there IS a 
. 
dual responsibility there, n~t only on the questioner but the Secretary, 
I 
and I hope lye can control that. 
. 
But I d~ no~ know; it is'a \'ery difficult thing, and I am thoroughly 
! 
sympathetIc ,nth the piecemeal---
I 
I 
I I 
76 
I 
I I 
\ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
: .... - , 
.,
' ~ 
,6 
-
The CU",UR,:\L\X. I was not asserting any right to control it. It '\"113 
merely a sug.~estion if there was some comity--
~enator :J:.licru:xLooPER, If it is a question of comity, \,e can ani,'e 
~~ 
.
' 
The CHAIIDIAX. He can t:eep it \dthin his control. 
Go ahead, Hr. Secretary. 
, 
XEWS1'.\ PEP.. 1: I::1'O,:,:S OF CL\SSIFIJ::D L\TOIDL\ nox 
, ,Senator LXl:SCIIE. ::JIl'. cilail'~11an, having listened to wh,tt. Sella tor 
Hlckenloopel' has jast s'lic1. I feel obliO'ed to 1l1,1ke a statement that this 
body, yested \yith SCC1'et iilfonnationoof tIle most intimnte character, 
c1ealin f" "'ith the security of the United States, has been bronght 
scandalously into disreDtlte by the frcquency 'with which reports are 
cal'l'ie~l in the l~e,,'spapers of "'hat is sllppo~cd to bf' c10l1C under .closed 
cxecllt1\"e meetll1£,:s. alld I do not feel C'ontellt that \"e CHI! "wk at 
these le:l.ks that are comlllo' out of this committee, I am llot satisfied 
with the statement tlwt. the~'c is nothil1!l' ,,-e can do about. it. Somebody 
is leaking thillQ:S, whether it is a nH>m't;er, :Jlemoer,; of the Srnate, 0'1' 
whethe.r it j s n1embers of the ;::taff. I do not l,now who it is, out it is a 
terrible mistake that this body, related most intimately to mattcrs 
that deal with the seeurih' of the United States, finds itself ""ith 
nell'spapers l'c])ortil1~' w}1[1.( tnhs place under confidel~ti,1 1 discussions. 
It cannot b~. dcnied that the"e reports arc bcil!g' carried outside 
,of the meetino'. HOII' do the)' cet. out'? I think \~-e oU2,'ht to make ;::n 
im'cstip:ation" "\re ol1~d1t to fil~l out ,,'hethcr it is fr~ll1 the start 01' 
where it emer~cs . 
~. 
The ""hole ;;;'odd can hugh at us at what happened, It seems you 
do not; lleed spies, all YOll han to do is look at t} lC p,~pers .and fully 
you \nll find renalecl "hat takes place confic1wtwll:v 111 tIllS rOOl1l. 
The CH.U[:,:\L\X. I wonrlel' if \,e could get on \lith the test Imony. 
Senator A1KEX. I \yoldcl like to obser',"e that sometimes the leaks 
appear ~ or 3 days after they come ont in the newspapers, \I'hich can 
hardly be in the cateO'ory of a leak. 
: The CH..\IF:':\L\X.L~t l~S r:et on, 
Senator LXC-SCIU:. The ~(:hairman wants to get on ,,,ith this matter, 
and I cnn lUlc1erst<md "Iylly he would want to get 011, but I will say 
to you with "'hat YOll are tnino' to O'et on i.'3 not :IS si~·ni.fi cant as y;jwt 
I am trying to sea"rch out. S"om~thir{g· is \\Tong "'ith t'his committee" 
Senator :JloI:sE. Mr. Chairman. 
-The CH.,\lP..~IAx. I wonder if "lye could proceed. 
Senator CLARK.. Let us go ahead. 
Senator MonSE. T\'e are not !!oil1O' to lean this I'ecord in this cO!l(li-
tion so far as the Senator from~Ol'egon is cOllcerned. I do not. think we 
ought to take up the Secl'eta~fs time ,,,ith qu,u'l'els of the committee, 
bl:t, Frank, you were not here and you are Il-1t a\\,~1l'e of ,,"hat Senator 
Hlckenloopcr W,1S talkin~ about. I'· e are not talkmg about "'hat you 
are talking a bout. That 'V;-as not raised. I had riscn to the defense of 
what I think i;:; a n'rv important doctrine thn.t always ought to prcyail 
at our hearing's "'hell 'i'le han a Cabinet onie'er or anyone else from 
the adminjstl'~ltjoll here; llamely, we should make 110 attempt to place 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
7 
anYl'estriction on the spokesman of the administration regarding 
what he says to the press afterward and "'hat he l',eleases. The o~ly 
suggest.ion was a Wl'Y helpful intention by the cl1<11r:na!l suggestlllg 
that the Secretary of Defcnse hold any statement 'when he goes ~:mt of 
this meeting snch as l'eleasino' the testimony he is about to grve us 
until ,ye will ha "e the whole r()~orc1 considered. 
' 
I. only ra i.::ed a point then', understanding the moti ntt ion. of the 
chrnrman to be of the hi o'hest, that I ,,'ouldnot support pLtClllg any 
restriction, under tIle s~p!lration-of-powers doctri!le, on Secretary 
'McXamal'a. That is how all this occul'red. ,Ye ',yere not t~ .. ll;:in~', Frank, 
about the problem that you are raising, und I do not think we ought 
to be taking the time of the Secretary to be talking about th, .. t now, 
That is for us to handle in our 0\\'11 executi \-e session. 
The ClI,-\!R3L\X. ::'III'. Secretary, ,,,ill yon go ahead. I think Y.-e ought 
to proceed.
, 
' 
-
Senator L_\USCHB. I ,,-ant to make this statement, ~tlld then I ,,,ill 
close. 
In the -report that \\-as filed by the sUdl', : ther~ \\'as an addendum, 
and in the addendum there ,,'as stated that X contacted the staff aIld 
told about the truth that tlierc \\'ero no missiles seell fired at OUl'ships. 
Y spoke to the stall:'. ",Yen as a member of the oe!lch for 10 \'Cars, when 
you begin oiYering that type of proof to esbblish a fac't, I simply 
cannot accept it. 
The ClI,,\H:::-'L\X. Proceed, Mr. Secretary. 
STAFF STUDY m::F1::SELl 
Sccrctary :JlcX_DL\Rc\. :311'. Chairman, I han sought in Illy state-
ment. tei hc as rcsponsi,-e as I can to what I believe to be are the ques-
tions in the mind of the committee re "'al'Cl in 0' the Tonkin Gulf incident. 
I haye not had the adnmtao'e, ho,,~yer, o~ the priyi18ge of exposure 
to the sta f1' study that I kno,,"'has beell completed and ci,rcnbted amOl!g 
you. I asked for that scnral ,,'eeks ao'o but was clemed ncce'3S to It, 
and I may, thorciore, not entirely respond to all of the information 
tlUtt you " 'ish to query me about. I ,yill be nry happy to take ques-
tions concerning the statement. 
' 
-
Senator M,\XSFIELD. Do I understand the Secretary requested a 
copy of the study and ,ns denied? 
The CI-L\IID[AX. That is correct. I also requested their command and 
control documents and it ,,'as denied. 
, Senator :JhXSFL!-:l.D. I ,vas thinkinO' of those in ju:s:tapo:3ition. 
The CIL-\JR:'IAX. That is correct. '" 
, ' 
;' " 
Sen!ltor GonE. Perhaps ,ye can exchange th02e' no\" That migJ:t 
solve It. 
' ' 
'. ' 
The CH.\TR:'L\X. I think ,YC ollO'ht to 0'0 on. 
'" 
Go on, ::'III'. Secretary. 
<:> 
b 
, :Secretary i>IcXA3f.\R_\. Let me comment, ::\fr. Chairman. These ani 
not to be equated. Yon can hal-'e anv ra'" materinl we han\ ",\~e tried to 
supply all of it to you. Some of it'is yery highly classified, and, "e as-
sume you ".-ill treat it with the Citre that its cla'3sificatlOn deserYes. ",Ye 
also are quite willing to let you have e,'alnation reports: but only after 
,ye 11a,-e ascertained that the authors of tho3Cl reports had access to all 
the appropriate information. It tums out that the author of this par-
ticular stGdy you mentioncd did not ha,-e access. I nenr heard, of the 
-------------
.----~------' ---
, 
... ,r' 
'( I 
~ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
8 
study ",Len yourcquC'3tecl it. Gcneral \"iJccler w',s not. a'Yare of it. The 
author did not quC'l'.\' (,.C'llcml I\'heeler or me auout the actions we took 
today, or tile actions of the Joint Chiefs, the ::\atiollal Sccurity Conncil, 
or those the Prcsident took. 
., 
. I do not think w)U \l'1ll1t e\'aluati,'e rcports sent o\'er llere that are 
incomplete. _'\.ll~' l:eport "'e lla\'c, yO~1 h;1,\'e access to, but only after it 
has,been properly re\'ic\\'ed as to its reliauility: 
. 
,
lour stafl study is (luite a diflercnt matter. I consider it a \'Cry seri-
?llS handicap to me in appearing before 'yOll torby to. adclre~s thC'se 
ISSUCS t.hat lla\'e bcC'n rc\'ie\\'ccl amI ac1cll'e:-;scd and consiclerecllll your 
st~ff study, c\'iclence of ,,·hich is cxamined ill yoUI' staff study, ,,:hich 
c\~ld.ellce has ne\'Cr e\'Cll been brought to my attention, but if you are 
wll 1 llIg to go "hcad \\'ith the hea ring on that basis, I am. 
TIle CJL\flDL\X. All of the staff was based upon )11aterial that came 
from your oflke, all of it. "'Ye !:!:a\'e you a complete list of e\'ery docu-
ment and e\'erything we hadl:Ccci\'cd, and it is anl.ilable to YOll as ~t 
\\'as to us. 
. 
ADDENDU)I '1'0 STAFF STUDY 
Secretary :UCX.DL\J!..\. Senator Lansche has j llst stnted it had an 
addendum to it that includcd information th~t \\'as not. ~ ,'ailable to me. 
The CJL\lr:)[.\x. That WQS not used in the preparation of the stafl' 
s~udy and it was purely an addendum of things that h~cl hapP'::'necl out-
SIde of the documents \\'hich cam~ from the Pentagon. 
~enator L.\t.'SCIIE. Let me sa)', :\11'. Chail'm~n, that. the addendum 
r eCited a number of contacts J~la de by a stal11i1~m wlth persons un-
I~IlO\::Il. X m\' it was oil'elwl as an addclldum supposedly ha \'illg an in· 
slglllficallt. importance, but it is then'. Three or four men ,,'110 \,ere 
supposecl to han:- been in the Tonkin Ba\' are alJcQ'ed to ha\'e sa id that 
there "'cre no missiles ftrecl. Irho are tl{c men? {tow did they contact 
them? 
. 
Senator COOP):r.. IYhat. ,,'ei o·ht \\'as 9:i \'en to it 1 
Senator )L\XSFn:r.n. jfr. C]lail'mall, I apologize fol' the illterruption 
but I ha \'e to be up here on the [JonI'. 
The CIf.\IJ!:lL\x. I would hope the Secretary ,\'QuId be allo'.nd to 
proceed. 
1\11'. Secreta1'Y ~ 
ESSEXTL\I, J:'.\CTS AnE THE S.\)IE TODAY 
Secretary .:\[c ::\.,\)L\R,\. j[l'. Chairman, on August 6, 196-4:, I appeared 
before this committee and tcst ified concel'11ino' the attacks in the Ton-
kin Gulf on the destroyers U.S.S. JJaddo;1] ~ncl U.S.S. TUi'ner Joy, 
and our response to tho8e attacks, 
OYer 3112 years ha\'e passed since that time. Ho\\'e,'cr, en:l1 with the 
uch-antage. of hindshight, I find that the essential facts of the l\,o 
at.tacks. appear today as the." did then, when they were funy explored 
,nth tlllS committee and other jlembers of Congress. 
Tho relonlut e\'ellts, and t hei r si o-nificance, lI'ere the. subject of inten-
sin debate in the House and S ell;te. Both my testimollY and that of 
other ofllcials of the Go,'cmmcnt reported the e\'idE'llce th:lt. cstablished 
cOllclnsi \'eh- the occml'ence of these attncks on F,S. n<1 \'a1 n ssels op· 
"erating in 'intcrnational wat()l's. This e\'idcnce \\'as a\'illInblc to us at 
the time of the clecision to make a carefully tailored response to the 
''------~~-,------
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
9 
~ttacks. In my testimony, I noted that, "'hilc SOllar and radar read-
. mgs may l'e subject to interpretation ::tnc1 argumc· lL because of sea and 
atmospheric condi.tions, \\'e hadintellig'ence reports of a highly classi-
fied and unimpeachable nature '\\'hich established, without question, 
that the atta?ks took place on both August :2 and August +. 
PART l'L,\YED BY U.s. X,.\VAL n:sSELs 
Also fully explored at tIw'time was the question whether the attacks 
on the ill addox and T'Upner J O!J "erc' in any way pro\-okec1 by or re-
lated to certain South Vietnamese naTal activity "'hich occurred in the 
period from July 30 to Auo'ust 4. As I stated then, and repeat llOW, 
ol~r na\'~l Yes~el.s pbyed abs~lutely no part in, ~md ,vere not ass?ciatecl 
wIth, t.llls actlVIty. There was then, and there IS now, no questIOn but 
that. the U.S. Gonrllment knew, and that I knew personally, the gen-
eral nature of some countermeasures beillg taken by the South Viet-
namese in response to North Yietnam's aggression. As I informed 
Congress, the boats utilized Ly the South Vietnamese were financed by 
the United States. But I said then, and I repeat today, that th~ .lladdox 
anc~ ~.I~e TUi'/lU Joy did not participate in the ~outh VIetnamese 
a.ctlVltIeS, that they had no kno,ylec1ge of the detrllls of these opera-
t.IOns, and that in no sense of the 'YOI'd could they be considered to 
. have backstopped the efl:'ort. 
. 
'As the chairman noted in the Senate debates, he \\-as informed that 
"our boats did not. cOIn'oy 01' support or back up any South Vietnamese 
n.aval ve.sscls" and that they \\'ere "entirely unconnected or unasso-
clated WIth am' coasta.l £Or,1YS the South Vietnam::se thcmsclns may 
haye conducted." He ,,-as so"informed and the information ,,-as com, 
pletely accur~lte. ",Yhen the South Yietnnmese conducted the first of 
th~ir 1:''''.0 nanl operations agclinst XOlth Yiclnamese targets ~lnrillg 
tIllS perIOd, the i11 addox patrol had not enl1 begun and the slup was 
at least 130 miles to the southeast. The attack on the Maddox on 
August 2 took place G3 hoUl's after completion of this South Viet-
namese na\'al operation. 'When the South Vietllamcse boats conducted 
theil: secOl~d foray, t.he Jladdo~) and the TUl'lWI' Joy were at least 70 
nautical 11l1les to the ilorthea;:;t. 
Senator C.\SE. I wonder if YOU could go a little more slo\,h'. It is a 
little hard to understa nc1. 
" 
" . 
Secretary ::HCXX:HARA. Yes. 
The attack made arrainst them on Au~ust 4 ,,,as almost a full day 
after this second South Vietllamese opemtion. 
" 
The facts thus show today, as they showed 3% years ago, that at-
tacks occurred against our ships both on A.Ugllst :2 and August 4, 
that ,ye had available to u- incontl'o\-ertible e\'ic1ence of these attacks 
'when the decision was made to make our limited and measured re-
sponse, and that these attacks were in no sense proyoked or justified 
by any particip;1tion or associ,ltion of am ships \\-ith South Vietnamese 
nayal operations. I ,,"ould like bl'ief~y to review these facts with you. 
REnEW OF F,-\CTS OF ATTACK 
On t.he 2d of August 1064, the r.s.s. J1 addo;(' was enga9;ed in a 
patrol in internatiOlul waters in the Gulf of Tonkin. _:-\..t no time dur-
ing the conduct of her patrol did J!addo,i] depart from international 
I 
I. 
I 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3_3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
~~~~ 
... -~
. =--- .--..,;.~~-~.-~-: 
.... --.-.:..... .... --,---,,-~-.... ~:.-.-,,- ..... --~ 
I ! , 
L 
10 
waters, or engage in any hostile act. Yet, ,,-hile she ,ya3 28 miles from 
the CO,lSt of Xorth Vietnam, on a COlll'se a,yay from the coast, Jladclox 
was attacked by three Korth Vietnamese torpedo boat:::. _-\.t. least three 
torp~does ,.-ere directed by the boats at the i11 addo;,,:, as well as 
m~chil~egl1n fire. The Naddox ayoided all tOl'l?e~loes. and. together 
WIth aU'craft arri..-ino' on the scene from the U.~.~ . Ti conderoga, re-
pelled the attack anel ~l.nk or damaged the atta~kjng c~raft . 
~_ 
The attack ?n Llfaddo:c took place in dayhgh,t. ~ o~'th "\ letl:ame~e 
reports of theIl' plans had prenonsly been obt<l.llled h om an mtelh-
gence source. The attackinsr craft \\'ere clearly seen by J1addox per-
sonnel and ,;'ere photographed, The launching of the torpedoes . by 
these PI' boats ,,,as also oh~en-ed as "ere the torpedo \yakes passlllg 
ncar ?'/addoi:. }Iachine o-ull fire from the attr,ckcrs "11S al"o obscITed 
and, indeed, one bullet ~\"as reco\'cred-it is in our pO;:;"l\~:;ion and I 
-han it here this morniwr if "l:ou \yish to inspect it. 
_ 
1'1 . 
;::, 
.J 
, ' 
.c 1 
l~
' 
1 ~ t .. 
-' 
n,s ,yas an unproyoked attack on .a SlllP o~ L1e~ ,lllrec~.~ ales on 
the lllgh seas. Xevert!lOless, no repnsal by tn~ llll~2cl_ ::-rates \\'as 
undeytaken. Th~ il!addo;t!, fortullately, had avolclecl_ygnlflcnllt ~lnm­
age Itself, and mfhcted damao-e on the attackers. ~Ill,:e 110 ratIOnal 
moth'e for the attack ,"as appn~'ent, ,ye belie\'CCl it possible that it had 
resulted from a miscalculation oc' an impulsin act of a local com-
mander. After the second attack, the chairman cornm:'nled ill Sen-
ate debate that I had stated. after the first attack on the Jladdo ~c , 
that I c1idnot expect it to bel'epeatecl. He also noted that thi" showed 
how "Tong I ,\-as. 
__ 
. 
-
On August 3, the cIa" followin o-, a note of prote.;:t \';~lS dIspatched 
to the X orih Vietnam .Jregime at"'the direction of the President. It 
concluded ,yith the \yords : "The U.S. GoYel'llment e:;:pects that the 
authorities of the reo-ime in X orth Vietnam \',-ill be under no mis-
apprehension as to tIle crraye consequences which "'ol.llcl inevitably 
result from any further ~nprovokcd ofIensi\'e miliLll'!, ~lctioll against 
q.S. forces." At the same time, the Pre::;ident made pnbli (~ his instn~c­
tlOns to the N [n-y to continue and to add another cle~troyer to It.S 
patrols in tho Gulf of Tonkin . 
. It wns ,yithin this context that \,e receincl, at about 9 :20 ~Ya sh ­
l!lgton time on the morning of August 4, information from an intel-
lIgence source that North Vietnamese na nil forces had been ordcred 
to attack the pntrol. 
-
Soon thereafter reports from tho 111 addox ,yere recei \'Cd that the 
-patrol -was being approached by high speed surface radar contacts 
an? that an attack appeared imminent. Other amplifying messages 
qUIckly followed and by about 11 a.m., \ye reccind a flash report that 
our clestroyers, then located some 60 to 65 miles from the coast of X orth 
Vietnam, were actually under attack, During this 5flllle time. intelli-
gence sources reported that North Vietnamese yes.sels stated they hacl 
our shi)5 under attack. ThrOlwhout the remainder of the moJ.'nino-
1 
;::, 
b 
ane ~ar y afternoon, flash message, reports of_ the engagement, some 
ambI:;uouS and some conflicting, continne.-l to pour in. Frequent 
telephone contflct 'YaS mnintainecl \yith the commander in chief of 
the Pacific Fleet, Hawaii. The Pl'esiclent was kept illfo~'mec1 of the:::e 
clevelopments. 
------------------
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
•.. -_._ """'---
~:.....~..:~~
, 
-' -~- ---' -' 
.,-~--
"-
' ._--- -' 
11 
rOXTIU.DICTIOX S EXA:\IIXED AXD RECOXCILED 
During thi.s period, I had a series of meetings "'it~l Jl~y. chief ci\"il-
ian and military acl\'isers ill which the app,Hent <1ll1b;gllltles 111lll cop-
traclictions in the relJorts ,yere eX11minecl and reconciled to om' satE-
fnction. ,,-e identified and refined Yn rious options fOl' ::l l'espoll s~ to 
the attack, to be presented to the President. Among t.hose Op~lOllS 
was the ~ir strike an-ainst the attackino' bo~ts and then' assocrated 
ba::;es, 'Yhich option ,~as eyc'ntualh: se1ect~c1 . As the options 'werE' iden-
tified, preliminary meSS<1o-e:3 \\'ere sent ~o appropriate operatio~Ull C0111-
m.anders alerting them t;'; the seYenll possibilities so that initial plan-
nmg steps cquId bc undertaken. 
In the early afternoon the Xational Security Council met, at 
'\'hich tiil1e we briefed thd ')rrrticil)ant:;, includiEo' the. Presidcnt, on 
I 
'1 1. l '  
1 
,~ I' 
. 
1 
t 1e al"a;. aUle detmls of the ntlr:.ck. ::lhortly thereafter, lnnng reCClnc 
the adnce of the .Joint Chiefs of Stal}' we recommt'!'llecl to the Pres-
ident, and he appl'onc1 fl. resl)onse cOl~si~tin~' of all :'Iil' ;::trike on the 
l~ ~' 
1 -.. 
, 
., 
~ 1 f' 
.,' .' 
D' 
'1 
1 anc :ji';ato".- L'oat brrses :1ild then' assoc):uec 
ac"m,e,~. 
Lll'll1g rll 
of this time, the lilcssage l'(:1)ol'ts of the eng110:C'mel,t f,'om the ships, 
plus other infonnrrtion of a \':cr ... !lin'hly cbs:,ifrecl Eatmc rec.::inxl elur-
ing the attack, ,\,e,'e being l'e\'le\\-~l to p.liminatc any dOllht that an 
attack on the clf'stroYel'S in hc~ oc c~lrecl. 
' 
For eX1'mple, I Sri\\' a lllC:,,':1gc from the oascenC' Ulsk group COIll-
mallller y,'hi ch exp;'C':;::iecl dO'!.1bts as to the yalidity or l.n:1,ny of the 
sOllar rcports. I dis cm:~ed this meSS:1f?,'C by telcphoEe y'.i.th the com-
mander in chief, Jlacific, and infol'lnecl him that, although \\'e ,rould 
cOl1tinue "'i~h the prq)ar[1.tiolls, the reprisal strike " 'ould not be 
executecl until '\'e 'l'erG a\~ ;::olnt e lv rositiye of the attack. He of coursc 
agreed nnd in a later telephone Cttl inforllled me that he ":lS "'~tisfiec1, 
from all the reports he had on hand, that an attack on our shIps had 
taken place. 
. 
Finally, at. about G :30 p.m., 'i'{nshington time, .the :llessage. to 
. execute the stnke was transmitted by the comm:mdcl' III ch,ef, PaCific. 
Those are the essential details. To recapitulate, on August 2, one 
of. our destroyers ,,,as attacked by Sorth Vietnamese n,1\""l forces 
WIthout pro,"ocation "hilc on patrol on the hio'h o:eas. Since the de-
stroyer had suffered no damn O'e and had repul~cd ' and damaged her 
attacker~, and since the possiGility seemed to exist that the incident 
,,·~s an lsola,ted act, no furt.her military response "·:ls,.:nac1e. X orr h 
VIetnam \I'as warllcd the next day hOlre\-er, of the "2'1'<1 \'e conse-
I . 
. , 
~ 
quences ,\' uch would inevitabIv follo'w" another snch att:,ck. Fm·ther-
more, the President-
allJlolmc~·d that thc patrol \yollld continue and 
,rould consist of h\-o destroyers. The next night, the t\YO destroyers 
w~re also attacked ,,,it-hout pro\'ocation on the high se:lS by X ort h 
V Ietname.sc nrrsul forces. 
' 
'iVhen these facts were est<lblished to the 'complete satisfaction of 
all .r~~ponsi?l~ authorit.ies, we resP.ollded "i.th an air stl'iJ~e on the 
faclhtles Wl11;l1 supported the attacklllg vessels. ' 
90-1S7-GS-2 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
~-
:"~ .. r 
_ 
~'~--:'~-"- "-.!...---",,:.- -~~_. 
_'l 
... _",",_~ _,_~ 
___ ~
, ~ ~.:._ 
12 
ACC17RACY OF DETAILS STILL QUESTIOXED 
Now, three and it half years later there again seems to be debate 
abont the essential aCCUnlC\' of the aboyo account. The questions that 
appear 110W to be raised al~e the same as those considered and settled 
at the t.ime : 
,':as tho patrol in fact for legitimate plll'poses?' 
" ere the attacks unproyoked ~ 
,Vas therc indeed a sccond attack? 
. 
. 
If there ,yas a second attack ,,"as thGl:e sufficient evidence aTailable 
at the time of our response to sUl)port this conclusion? 
I \\ouldlike to address these questions. 
W.iS l'URPOSE OF PATIWL LEGITDL\TE? 
First, \yas the patrol in fact. for legiti!nate purposes ? 
. 
1 
Patrols of the naturc of those carned on by .11 Cl(M ox and 7 U I'ller 
Joy \ycre initiated 'in the ,yestern Pacific in 19G2. Thev wcre calTiecl 
out in international \yftters a.lOno· the coastlines of Cornmunist coun-
tries in that area. They.werc ope~l patrols and no ho~tile ac~iolls \yere 
eYor taken by the U.S. forces im'oll'cd. ProYocatll'e actIOns wE','e 
al'oided .. The pmpose \yas to learn \"hat. \yo could of military acth~ity 
~nd ennronmental conditions in these part.') of the ,,'orId, opcratmg 
In waters ,,"here we had enry le£>:al right ·.to be. The primary pl~rpo~e 
of the Naddox \\'as to obselTe X orth VIetnamese nantl actlnty III 
t~lose "aters: in ,'iew of the e\'idence \\'e had of infiltration by sea b:' 
North Yietnam into South Yietnam. Othor secollClary pmpo.3CS were 
area familia l'ization and oDsernltion by \'isual and electronic means of 
any other acti vit.v of military interest. lYe had the undisputed right 
to do this. In \'ie~'; of our assistance to South Yietnam, snch observit-
tions were needed. 
~he suggestion has appeared incidcntally t11a'tbe~ause .11 ad({o.:c, 
prIOr to commencement of its patrol, took abroad certalll COml1UllllCa-
tions equipment, with personnt.'l to operate this equipment, it.') patrol 
hac~ some clift'ereIlt and presumably more sinistcr pU~'p~se than others 
':'hwh h~d preceded it. This is simpl.:> not true. Th~ mISSIOn of Oosc1':-a-
bon "'IlIch I hal'e outlined \la'" to be fulfilled mth the re£>,1.darlv Ill-
stalled equipmcnt of the ships.-The extra equipment brought ab·road 
ill acldox consisted in essence of standard shi pooard radio reeci nrs 
added to the ship's normal complement of such reccinl'S in order to 
give an added ca pabi-lity for detecting indications of a possible hostile 
attack on the patrol. 
. 
. The Congress, at the time of the debates on the Tonkin Gulf resolu-
tion, \I'as a\\'are that yjsual and electronic sun;eillance of the area mlS 
one of the purposes sen'ed by the De Soto patrol. All)' suggestion 
now that the installation of passi"e radio recei 1;ing equipment changed 
the essenti.al nature of the patrol is unwarranted. 
I n'ight add that yirtual1y all of the De Soto patrols, since their 
commencement in 1962, had been outfitted \\'lth similar equipment for 
the same primarily dcfensiYe purpose's . . 
Seconcl, were the attacks Ulll)l"O\-okec1? 
Senator ~IUXDT. Are you defining the De Soto pati'ol1, 
51 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
---. :.....~:..:.:...-~---~----.~.~-~-.-
. -~_
. ~' .:, ... 
13 
Secretary l\IC~.DL\R .\. The term as I am using it here refer.;; to the 
patrols in the Tonkin Gulf of "hich this was the fourth, one having 
occurred in 1962, one in lOG0, and the third in the early part of 1~6 -1, 
and the fourti1. in August 1DG:!'. _\.cl ua 11)' it is a. generic term co:·erlll.g 
a broader range of patrols in the western PacIfic but as used In thIS 
pa l!er it refers to the fO~ll' patrols in t.he Tonkin Gulf. 
Second, \\-ere the attacks unjwo\'oked '? 
. I haye l-:eard it suggested that the patrol pro:~oked the ~ttac1;:s by 
mtrudmg mto the territorial ,Yaters of :K or-tIl \ ·lCtnam. Tne facts, I 
think, are these. 
.' 
l~rior to the first atta ck, on August 2, the Maddox had been ~ngagecl 
O~llts pat.rol since July 31. At no time during the conduct of tIns pat~'ol 
dId the i1f addox depart from intemational "nte~·s. It had been m-
stru~ted to. approach the X ort h Yietnamese coastlIne no clo?er th~n 8 
nautlcallm1es and any offshore island no closer than 4 na,utlcal mIles. 
Maddox adhered scrupulouslY to these instructions. ,Yhen the patrol 
resur~ec1 wit.h 111 adelo.x and ill mel' Joy, the shiys werc. instructed to 
remaIn at. least 11 mIles from the coast. These mstructIOns also were 
followed. The United States recocYJlizes no cIn im of a terri torial sea, 
in excess ?f 3 miles. This consistel~t position of. the United States \yas 
reemphaSIzed at the close of tho 19GO ConventIOn on Law of the Sea. 
in Geneva. 
. 
There h:cye, howC\-er, been statements reported in the press tl!at !he 
L1f addo;)) entered into waters claimed by X ol'th Yietl1!,lll as tern tonal. 
Snch statements have no basis in fact. At no time pnor to the August 
196-:1: Tonkin Gulf incidents' did the North Yiet.namese Goyernment 
claim a width of territorial sen i.n excess of 3 miles. The X ortll Viet-
namese Goyernment. sl1cceeded the French Goyernmcnt. \\'11ich adhered 
tothe 3-mile limit. Under the rules of i.nternationalla\\-, no claim by 
N ort.h Viet.nam in excess of 3 miles \yould be assulllec~ unless speci fieally 
made and published. It shoHld be noted that Cambodia, a sister suc-
~esso r state, publicly adopted the French 3-mile rule on ac!~ieying 
mc~cpende~ce . L ater, it proclaimed a 5-mile limit. S.onth \ letn,,!:l 
chums 3 mIles. ThE:' first statement of X orth Vietnam whIch approaches 
a claim in excess of 3 miles occurred ,Yell after the attacks on Septem-
ber 1, 106·1, in the form of a broadcast from Radio Hanoi in "'hich it, 
was.sta!ed, "~heDemoc l' atic R epublic of Vietnam c1eclarec~ that the 
ter~'ItorJa l sea IS 12 miles .'~ Xo official documentary confirmatIOn of the 
claIm asserted in this broadcast is kI10'Yll to C'xist. 
In short,. a~ not time during the patrol did either Tof the ;~cstroye rs 
lea '-e the ,lllgI1 seas and enter areas claimed by the ~ orth , letnamese 
or recoglllzecl by the United States as national waters. 
The question' mio'l1t be asked 110\,e.-or: Should not "e as a practical 
n.latter have assum~d a, clai.m of 12 miles since this is the l:niform posi-
. tron .of the Communist countries? The simple answer IS that Com-
mUl1lst countries do not haye such a uniform position: Cuba and 
Pobnd eac11 adhere to the traditional 3-mile limi.·, 'Thile Yugoslavia 
and Albania claim 10 miles. 
SOUTH nET X :Drr:SE OPET:.\ TroXS 
Ano~h er point relating to ':pro\ocation~' was discussed and disp?sed 
of .durIng the debates qn the Tonkin Gulf resolution and the hearmgs 
pnor thereto, but, of late, it seems to h8..-e been resurrected. It is tho 
• 
_u, 
I I 
I 
I i i 
i 
I 
I I 
I 
I 
I 
r'" _. . .. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
14 
suggest-i.on that Ollr patrol ":as in some \yay connected. with certain 
reconnaIssance and bombardment activities of South Vlet.namese pa-
trol <:l'aft against North Vietnamese. 
' 
... 
I mi'eH1ned members of this committee of these actlnties of the 
. South Vietnamese in an informal meetino' 011 August 0, 1DG:1, after the 
attack ~n t.he N addo~/). The subject \YIlS again raised in lesser. clebil in 
my testImony before this committee on August G, 19G:1:. Iyolllted out 
that these raids \"ere a le""iLim,tte attempt bv the South YletllltmeSC to 
counter and retaliate aO'ainst the systematicinfiltr<ttioll of their conn-
try by sea 'which had b~en ca.rried out by 1\ orth Vietnam f~l' the pl:evi-
ous t.wo and a half years. I described the scope of that. lllfi1trfttlOr~; 
that IS, 1<10 kJlO\\'n incidenLs between .J uly and December 1031, an esti-
mated 1,400 infiltrators havino' been lancled in South Vietnam dUl'ing 
that time. 
I:> 
, ,Yith l'espc~.'t to t.he legitin~ac:y of tllO;~ SOl:th Vietnamese opera tions, 
} ou, ~Il'. Chau'man, stated dUl'lng the Ionbn Gulf floor debates; 
. 
'I.'he boats thf\t lI:a, haye struck at the coa,:;t;11 areas of ::-;ort11 \'ietnam may 
have b~ell Supplied b;' us, lYe hC\\'c· l.Jeen IJelpillg South Vietn:\lll arlll it~el £. I do 
not knc;w about the spccitic uoats. 
. .. .! '. ". 
I pc!·,;QrJfdly think tlrh is <l perfec-tly ]('gitim:1le and propP!' \\'.~y to defe~ld 
oneself from tile kbel of aggre;;::;ion South Yietn:lm has been subJected to for 
years. 
S~I:atol' Morso, at ,the hearing on August G, ~pecifically }'aisecl the 
que"tIon of a COll!lcction betwecn our patrol and [he ~onth "\ lctIw.mese 
bon~bal'Clment of two X orth Vie.tn.:t;nc;;e isbllC13 ,,'luch hncl occurred 
some t\yo and ,1 half days pi·jor to the nttack on .!!ad~lo J.·, anel I re-
sponc1ed that tlle ~'e ,\yas no connection. The hro OPCl'l1t.LOllS ,,'ere sep-
arate and distinct.. I informed YOU that our c1estroyers took no part 
whatsoe,"er in the South Victna~nesc operation, They did not com'oy, 
Support, 01' back up the South Vietnamese boats in any way .... A.s I 
stated during the hearings; 
. 
" 
.. * * " as I reported to you earlier this week. we understand that the South 
, letllallleSC sea fo'·.::e carried out vatrol action around tliese island;; allLl actaally 
shelled the paint::; the," felt were associatc:d with thi::; infiltration. 
Our ships had ab.,oiutely no kuo\\'Jec1;;e of it. \\'ere not connected ,lith it; in no 
sense of the \I'ord can ue considered to ha\'e backstopped the effort. 
That statement remains entirelv accurate, I can confirm today thnt 
neither the ship commanders !lor thc embarked task STOUp commander 
~lac1 ar<y know1cdf"e of the South Yietname~ e action against the two 
Is1an~s or of ~ny "'other specific South Vietname3e operations against 
t!le ~orth. Hlghel' nDxal commands were made aware of the opera-
~lOns by Commander, U.S. Militnry Assistance Command, Vietnam, 
In order to avoid mutual interieren?l orconfusion between our pat.rols 
and those operntions. 
' 
n illECTlOXS TO u.S. DESTROYERS 
. Throughout the patrol conducted first by the i11 addo~tJ alone and 
ll1:ter by the .:.11 acldox and the l'Hrne?' J O?/, tho U .S. destroyers were 
chrecteLl to remain in \y[tters which \",ould kel!p them from becoming 
operationally im'oh"ec1 \",ith the South Vietnamese actiyity. The re~­
s~rictions this imposed on t.hc patrol \'\ere such thnt, at one time, C011-
slc1cratioa \las gi,'en to its nbandonment. The task group comlllanc1er 
kne.w .only that, certain. South Vietnamese na\'al operations \\'(:re 
penoc1lcally cnlTied 011 111 the area. lIe had no detalled knowleclge 
I 
I 
I 
. I 
\ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
15 
of their type or of where or ,yhen they '\'ou1cl be conducte(1. Indeed, 
his lack of blo,dedo'e ,vas such that he mistrtkenly identified t1le 
South Yietnamese cr~ft returnino' from their oper::ttion of July 31 
as Soyiet P-G class boats, 
~ 
. 
·~ .In point of fact, our patrols and the shore bOl:lbarc1men!~ by South 
"\ letnameS:-l forces \';e1'e sepa ra ted in both ti:ne :md space. "' '. hen South 
Vietnamese PTF's bombarded the islands of Hon Xieu and Hon :JIc 
011 the nigH of July 30-31, the :lladdox had not en~n commenced her 
patrol, and y,as d least 130 miles to the southeast of the nearest of 
tho:~c is1::tnds . ..At the time of the attack-on the JJaddox on Angust 
2, the South Vietnainese boats had been back at their base in Da X ang 
fol' almost 33 hours. 
I learned suhsequent to my testimony of August 6, 196'1, t~lat an-
other South . Yietnamese bomb:ur1ment tool: place on the lllght of 
August 3--"J.. At the time of tInt action, the ll1arldox and Tu,nwr Joy 
\\ere at. least 70 miles to the northeast. The X orth Vietnamese at-
tack on 11!addoa: and TW'ner Joy on the night of August 4: occLllTed 
some ~~ hours later. 
' 
I thinl.( it impOl'tant, too, in dealing with this issue, to recall that 
the Presic1e~lt had annolDcec1 publicly 011 August. ~ th~t our patrol 
,youlc1. COnLllll1.e and COIFlst of bro destroyers. It I S chfficult to be-
llen, III the face of that. lUlllOl!I;Cemenr. and its ob\'iou:" pnrpo::c of 
asserting our right to freedom of the sc;s, that enl1 the::\' orth Viet-
namese could connect the patrol of the UadaM' and Tur'na J oy 
,dtll a South Yietna.mese action taking place some 70 miles a ,\'ny. 
w~-\s TIIEm:: ,\ sJ:::coxn ATTACK' 
X 0"', thirdly, was there in~leec1 a second attack ~ 
I know of no claim that the attack on J!addox on _'\ugust 2 did not 
occur, As for the second attack, the incident occurred Oil !J. \'cry. (~ark, 
moonk:os, ovel'cast night. ~\.s would be expected umler these cO;lclttlOn;;;, 
som~ uncert.ainty existed, and to thi.s day exists, about sO:I",C of the 
precise c1etatls of the attack. But there should be no lUlCel't:nnty about 
~he. fact .that .an attack took place, Tile eyic1ence perbining to the 
mCldent IS ren~\ycc1 in the follo\ring pl1ragraphs. 
. . 
, On the cvellIno' of AU'ZllSt"l 19G-J., Task Group 7:2.1 consisting of 
U.S.S. ,~[addo~: l~ld U.S.S. 1'~I,1~ne1' foy, ,dtll CO:JIDESDf~~ 1£):2 eEL-
barked III Jl addo;c and ftctin~ as CTG 7:2.1, \\'as proceecllllg on an 
easterly course in the Gulf of Tonkin at i\. speed of 20 k:1ot" ... A.t abo'Lt 
7 :40 p,m., Tonbn Gulf time:' the task group commander, Cal?t. J .• J. 
H errick, US::\, ou:::eryec1 Oll the surface search radar at. least h\'e con-
ta?ts, which he c"alllatecl as probable. torpedo boats, located.nbout 8i3 
mIles to the northeast of the two ships .. At 7 :46 p.lll" J! addox and 
T~l~n ei' J oy ch::tnged COlll'se to 130 and increa.sec1 speed to 28 knots to 
. aVOid ,yhat t}le task group commander had eyalu~\tec1 as a trap .. 
Shortly atter £) p.m" both ships: radars held conracts apl)rosm1atel:' 
14 miles to the ea:3t. These contacts "'ere Oil course 160. speed 30 knot<;. 
~~t [hat!5 m~ the b\'o U.S. ships ,yere approximate;y 60 miles from the 
N ort h "\ letm.llle:3C coast. 
At abO\lt £) :;)1) p.m., both Jl/(lddo;z, and TW'lIei' J o!./ opened fire on the 
approachmg craft when it was e"ic1er:,t from their l11alleUnl'S that they 
lTo com'crt local 'IoDh-:in Gulf time to c.d.t. subtr~ct 12 hour,. 
-------_._-
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"'ere pre.:;sing in for attack positions. _-\.t about this time, the boats wer8 
at a fange of C,OOO yards from Jladdo.l' wh~Jl the raclar tl'flcl~ing inch-
cated that tho cOlltact had turned awaY and begull to open III range. 
Torpedo noises \I'ore then heard by the Ji(lddox's sonar. A_ reP?Ii: of 
th ~ tol'p ~c1o noise was immediately passed .to the T 1O:llel' J oy by lllter-
Sh1p radlO and both ships took ~"asiYe actIOn to a ,-old the torpedo. 
RJ~porii-soF EYE,YITXESSES 
A. torpedo wake " as then si2,'hted l)assing abeam TW']le ]' J oy from 
aft to forward, approxim(\tel!~ :JOO feet to port on the same bearing 
as that reported by J~addox . This sighting "-as made b:r at least fOlIl' 
of Ttfi'-ner Joy's topsIde personnel: the fOl'\\-ard gun dll:,ectOl' ofhcel.', 
Lt:. (J_g.)John J. BaITY, USXR i. the port lookout, E~l\Yln R. ~enjeJ, 
S~, DS); ; by a seaman who \\'as ill the fOl'\\',1l'd gun ehrector ,nth the 
dIrector officer, Larry O. Litton, SX, 'GSX; and by a seaman ,,-ho 
was op~ratol' of the aftel' gun director, Rogel' X. Bergland, SX, USX. 
At about 10 :24 p.m., one target was taken under fire by Turner Joy. 
N'umerous hits were obsen-ed O~l this target and it disappeared from all 
radars. The commandino' officer and other Turner J oy personnel ob-
SCITed a thick column of black smoke from this target. 
L ater, 10 :-17 p.m., durino' the attack a, search1ight ,,-as obsernd by 
all signal bric1 ~e and ma~euyerina bridge personnel including the 
c<?mmanding ofhcer of U.S.S. TU1'lle~' Joy. The beam of the searchlight 
elIcl not touch the ship, but ,"as seen to s\\'ing in an arc toward TW'iwr 
Joy and ,,-as ilnmec1iately e:stino'uishec1 ,,-hen ail'craft from the combat 
air pat.rol orbiting aboye th'e ~hips appl'oached the vicinity of the 
searchlight.. (,Walter L. Shishim, Q:.\[CS. USX ; Richard B. Johnson, 
S?lIl, US~ iRichard D. X ooks, Q:'\I 3, 'GSX: Richard M. Bacino, S:'\B, 
1!SX; an~l Gary D. Carroll, S';}I3, US~, stationed on the TI.lme]' J ois 
SIgna 1 bndP'e all made \nitten statements that they SIghted the 
searchlight. ) 
The silhouette of an attackinp' boat ,,-as seen by at least four T1t7'nei' 
J.oy persollnel whe11 the. boat c~me behreen the flares dropped by an 
aIrcTaft and the ship. lYhen the.so foul' men >fere asked to sketch \\·hat 
they had seen, they accurately sketched P-!-t>'pe boats. (X one of the 
four had eyer seen a pictme of a P-! bO:lt. before). (Donald '/ . Shar-
key, B:'I1:3, -CSX; Kt'nneth E. G:U'l'ison. SX. 'Cs~: Delner .Tones, G:'\IG 
SN, USX, and Arthur B. Anderson, FT SX, USX, are the four per-
sonnel from the Tu rne r J oy "'ho sizhted the boat.) 
In addition to the aom'e, a gll!1ncl"s mate second cbss stationed 
aft of the siQ,'n:11 brido'e aboard U.S.S. Jiaddox saw the outline of a 
boat .rhich ·"-as silholfettecl by the lizht of a burst from the 3-ineh 
projectile fired at it. (Jose n. San Augustin G:.\IG], USX.) 
.. The commanding ofHcer of .. :-\.ttack Sqnadron 52 from the T/con-
del'oga (Comdr. G. H. Edmondson, rSX) and his n-ingman (Lt .. J. _-\.. 
~uTt ~m), \\-h ile flying at altitudes of behYeen 700 anc11,f'i00 feet in the 
V}-c.l1ltv of the byo destroyers at the time of the torpedo attack both 
sIg-Meet gun flashes on the surface of the n'ater as Y,-ell as light antiair-
craft burst;; at their approximate altitude. On one pass ol"er the two 
destro;rers, both pilots positirely sighted~. "snakey" high speed wake 
1% mIles ahcncl of the lead destroyer, u.:::;.S. 111 add ox. 
1\,0 U.S. :.\Iarine Corps personnel ,,-ho were manning machineguns 
on U.S.S. Maddox sn\\' lights pass up the port side of the ship, go out 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3_3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
17 
ahead, and pass doml the starboard side. Theil' written statement as-
serts their belid that this "-as 011e or more small boats at high speed. 
{These were ),Intthe\\' B. Allasre SGT rS.:\IC, and Dadd A. Prouty, 
L/CPL, US':\IC.) 
-" 
_ 
INTELLIGEXCE HEPOItTS 
In. addi tion to .the abon, intelligence reports receind f1'9.111 a highly 
class.16ed and ulllmpeacha1;lle source reported that North V letlla m "'as 
maklllg preparations to attack our destroyers with t:"o ~watow boats-
and ,nth one PT boat if the PT could· be made ready III tune. The same 
source reported, '"hile the el1O"a o-ement '''as in progress OIl August 4-, 
that the attack was Undel'\n1y.bII~llnediate ly after the attack. end~d, the 
SOurce reported that the X orth Yietnamese lost hyo shIps 111 the 
engagement. 
. Xo one: -within the Department of Defcnse has reyiewed all of this 
m!ormatlOll without al'l'iying at the unqualified conc1usio:l tlwt a detey-
l1lmed attack '''as made 011 the J! addox and T.ZU'IW,· Joy III the Tonkm 
Gult on the nio-ht of August 4, 196-:1:. Yice Adm. Roy L. Jol!nsOJ.l, 
US.N, com111anc1e1' of the U.S. 7th Fleet at the time, stated 1Il hIS 
ren e,y of the combined chronology and t1'<'lC];: charts submit-ted by the 
task group commander: 
COlllmander, Se"E'nth Fleet is conYillced be, and allY doubt that :'Ilac1dox and 
Turner Joy were subjected to' an tUlpro,-okec1 sllrface torpcc1o attack all the night 
of 4 August 1964. 
Adm. 1'. H. Moorer then commander in chief, Paci6c Flect, con-
I . 
, 
CUl'l'eC III that. apprais'll. 
In '}Yashington, the Director of the .Toint Staff, Lt. Gen. Da\·id _\.. 
BUl'cllln~l, USAF, analyzed the incoming information froll~ messagc 
t~'affic, 'Ylth the assistance of the Joint StaIr. He then g,l\'c h IS e\'lll\H~­
hon to the Secretary of Defense : ':1'he actun.lity of the attack IS 
confirmed." 
In th: face of t.his eddence, I can only conclude that many of 
the perSIstent questIOns as to ,,,hether 01' not an attack took place Illust 
ha\'e arisen from confusion between the .. :\uo-ust 4 attack and an-
other in~ident \I'hich occurred on the 1Sth of S~ptembel' 19GJ; that is, 
about '10 days later. J .. t that time, the F .S. destroyers J! m·to-!! . and 
EdvJards were p~\trolling, at night, in the Gulf of ?,onk.in, al,lcllllltw1!y 
~'ep~)l'tcd thelllselns under attack ,Yhile the ensuIng slttwtIOn reports 
~nchcated t!lC probability of hostile cmft in the area of the patrol, 
It 'I'as deCIded at both the ,Yashingtoll and field commaJlCl lel'e1s 
that no credible eyidence of an attac];:-esistcd. It should be noteel that 
the i!ltelligence source that confirmed the attacks of_-\.ugust 2 ancl J 
pl'ondecl no edc1ellcc of any ellemy action on Septcmber IS. In "iew 
?f ~)l~ r ulll'esoh'ed doubts,' no rcfaliator}' action was ta,ken . .:\Iany 
!Ucl.Indu[tls ,\'ho were HOt a'l'are of all of the facts about all thrce 
l11:ldcnts, tha t .is, ;""\..ugust :2 and -1, and Septembcr 18, 11a \'e Jl~ael~ the 
mIstaken as~umptlOn th ~~t descriptions of thr Septemher 18 lIlcrdent 
"'ere l'efelTlllg to the second Tonkin Gulf incident.. .Aware of the 
negatiye fir~c1illgs 011 September IS, they ha "e lIlistakcnl~' assumed that 
there IS serlOUS doubt as to whE!thel' the "s€cond" Tonkm Gulf attrrck 
in fact took place. 
----- --- ------
I I 
l I 
! t 
, 
f 
f 
~ I I 
I I 
I I i 
f ! 
f , 
I I 
I 
(J 'l 
Ol 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
is 
As a final point on this issue, U .S, Illln 1 forces in the 31/2 yea rs which 
1u1.\'e eLq,secl since the Au,<:>'l1:;~ 1964 incidellts haye captured seyeral 
~orth Yietnamese llaval p~'sol1nel . These persollnel were extensirely 
mter~·ogate(l. One of these, captured in July 19G6, stated ~10 had taken 
part In the ~\.l1glt"t 2, 19GJ, attack on the Jladdox, and Ills account of 
that attack coincided with omobselTations. He professed no knowl-
edge of the Al12:u~t 4 attack nlld said that. he believed that PI' bonts 
,wre not im'oh-c c1 in that attack. Hestatcd that S\l"<1tOI';,':; could haYe 
been USEd fOt· that athck !lis (li:::claimel' of PT pa,rticipation is con-
tradicted by information recei red from a later cnpti ve, A X orth Yiet-
namese naval ofiicer captured in July 1067 proyjdecl the name of the 
C(:Hllmallcler of a PT sqnadron. In intelligence reports rec~iye cl imme-
chately aH.er the August '1 attnck, this cor~11!lanc1er and Ins squadron 
"-ere. Idenhfiec1 hy name and number as partlClpants~ 
, 
, ' 
SCI'FICIEXT E\-WEX CE ,\,.ATL_\uLE TO SUPPOIlT COXCLlJSIOX 
NOI,", finally. if there was a second at'tack, Iras there sufficient e\"i-
dence a.'-aibble at th e timB of our response to support this conclusion? 
.Some of tlle dct[l il5 citerl !lbon, particularly the statements of eye-
'ntnesses, although g,lthered immediately aiter tho atbck, had not 
reached 'Yashil1!:'.ton at the time that the reprisal air strikes were 
ordered execntec( SlImcient in TOl'matiol111 ,\"a:'> in the hand:; of te Presi-
dent, hov,2Y01', to e::tab1ic:h beyond any doubt then or noy\- that an 
nttn.ck.kH1 taken p1<lCC. :'-1] 0'" ~11? to rep'~at af'ain that 5nfol'In!ltioll: 
.An lllt ~ JJi ,~ence report of a highh- classified aJl~l unlmp~ ,~chnb ]e}ln­
iure roc'cInd shol'tlr before the engngement, siatll1g th~t. ~orth '\ let-
, namese Imval forces mtended to attack the J! addox and Turner Joy. 
Reports from the ships that their radars indicated they 'nre being 
shnclo\H:c1 by high speed surface nssels. 
_ Reports from the shi.ps that they \\-e~'e b ~ing appronchec1 by the 
hIgh speed vessels and nil attack a,ppearec1 lmmment. 
Reports from the ships that they \fere ur~der a~tack.. 
. 
;~ rel?Ort hom th ~ ships that ' searchlIght lllur:lll1atlOn hnd been 
utilIzed oy the attackIng craft and th!lt gunfire nga1l1st the patrol had 
been obsen-ed. 
A l'epott. that hyo torpedoes had passed close to the TUJ'ner Joy and 
that there had heen positi'-e visual sightings of "hat appeared to be 
cockpi~ lights of patrol craft passing near the lJ{addox. 
An lI1t elli~'ence report statin£' that North VIetnamese naval forces 
had reportecl that. t.lley "ere im-olvecl in an engagement. 
Reports from the 'U.S. ships thnt they had sunk t\fO nnd possibly 
three of the attacking craft. 
' 
,An inte1li!:':cnce rel)ort statiM: that Xorth Vietna,l11ese 11c1,nl forces 
had rpportecnosing two ships in-the engagement. 
A (cport from the onscene task group cOLlmanc1er that he was cer-
tain that the n:nbush had taken place, although precise details of the 
l'ng'agenwllt \,ere stil1not known. 
~\. i:epOl't fron~ the COE1!1l<llldel' in chief, P,lcific, tbIt he had no doubt 
that. <l;l rtttnck had OCClIlTN1. 
.-\11 of th:;: infon~lati()n n'a:3 nn,ilnbJe prior to the time the Executi\'e 
order \\-"S is,;ucc1. 
--,,'-- ---------
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
19 
. 
)lOXSTP.OL'S I~SIXL , \TIOXS 
As a final point, I must :lc1c1ress the suggestion .th~t: in s~1;1e W~}:, 
the Go\'el'l1mellt. of the l~llited State~ induccd the lJ1Clc[cnt. OIl .-\'llgllSt 
4 ",ith the ~n tellt of proYiding' an excuse to ta~e the ret.~lli~ltorr action 
wInch we lJl fact. took, I C~l!l only ch,lractel'lze sueh lllSlllll<lLlOnS as 
monstrous. 
. 
TI~e effec~i\'e repulsion of the Angnst :? ath'.ck on~ the Jiudrlox ,,·!tll 
relatn'ely lngh cost to the small X orth Yietr,amese ~ a \'Y: cOllI~lecl \nth 
Cur protest which clearly and UllCq aj \'OC:11ly warned of the> serIous COll-
seq~lCnc('s of n, reculTcncc, made. us confident that another atlack was 
unlikely, The published order of the President that the 112stroyers 
should continue to assert. the l'10'ht of the frcedom of t lIe s~as in the 
Gulf of Tonkin, amI setting fortII the composition of the pah'ol: should 
have sen'eel to a\'oid am' flll'thcr misllnclprstanc1~ng·. _\s the patrol rc-
s,lImed the ships \\'e1'O oi~lerec1 to remain 11 miles f(ol1l t!\2 cO:lo'tline ill 
heu o~ the 8 m,iIes ol'del'id 011 the prC\'iOllS pi!trols~ hanlly i:,ld\c:atin 
?f, a.1l 1,lltent. to lllc1uce another attack. As n matter of teet, OlllllC'Il' O\\,ll 
li1~tJatn' e . the h\:o ships approached the coastlin? ~10 clo3?r than IG 
mIles c1urlllg theIl' patrol. But beyond that, I fincllt lIlcol\cemlhle that 
anyone en:>n remoteh ral\\ili,ll' with our society and ~"stem of GO\'-
emlnen! coulc1 Sl1SDcct the existence of a consPlracy ,,'11ich \':u,J1d in-
dude almost, if no~t t,lI the entire ch['.in of miJitan romnu'.lld in the 
Pacific, the Chairman ~f the Joint Chiefs of SU'.1i·: thp .Joint Chiefs, 
the SecrC'tar} of Ddrnsc, and his chief ei,'iJiHIl assisr<lllts, the Secre-
tar} of State, and the Pl'esident of the United States. 
}:[r, Chairman', that concludes m} st~l.ter!1('nt, and I \\'iiI be' \'ery hap-
py to try to ans\\'er any qnestions. 
The CII.\I1~::\L-\X . Thallk you, }Ir. Secl'etary. 
, 
, 
I \:'oulc~ llkc to han.~ a few preliminary qupstJon:; \nth rp~'<H'd, to 
the SItuatIOn under \\,ltich this "'hole ntTair tonk place. I d')n t thlllk 
they are \'('~'Y c1ifl1cult to n11S\7e1'. 
!XTEJ:XAT, T}WUBL'ES OF KIL\Xn GO\,EnX~·IEXT 
Mr. SecretarY, is it true that the ()'o\'el'lllllent of Geaecll Klumh 
which oyerthTe;y the }Iinh junta in J ~n1<1ry 1964 \\':15 in serious tron-
ble by the Spl'lng and early summer of 196-1 '1 
, 
" 
Secretary ~lcX:DL\H.A. I think there \\'as C0l1':11c1emble CliSSCllSl0n 
among the members of the gonrnment, )11'. ChairmalL ~1l1d there was 
then ancllater a, series of ch,ulO'cS in the O'onrmnent ~1~ f1. result of that 
dissension. 
a 
'" 
The CR\IIOL\X. Did you not say recently 01\ ")Iee[ the Press':' and 
I quote : "Three and a half years ago th~ South Vietl\am~fe for('C's \I'ere 
on the .-erge of defeat. The X orth VlCtnnmese and '\ letcong forces 
were on the \'erge of "ictory," 
. 
.
. 
Isthatnccurate? 
. 
Secretai·y Mc:LDL\TI,\. ~Ir. Chairman, if I said that. I mi~ C'" till1ated 
the clate. IYha t. I "'as talkilJf" about-I think late: in that same brond-
cast I specifically referred t~ it was July 1%.1. I should ha':e said two 
and a half years ago. That \,;as 'the refel'ence I was making, 
The CHAI1~:lI.\X, Tha,t is n quote from ju~t ~ \n~ek.:; ~1g0 . 
Secretary McN'.DL-\n:l. It may be, }11'. Chairman. I ,\'ould have to 
h~we the full transcript of ,d1,lt I sniel. I believe I mentally deducted 
.- -......_._----
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
COpy 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
SOUTHFJ\..ST ASIA HESOLUTImr 3::./ 
Whereas naval units of the Conrrmmist regime in Vietnarfl) in violation Of 
the principles of the Charter of the United nations and of internatione,l 
l m-T) have deliberately and repeatedly att~(;ked. United States naval 
vessels lm·r:fully present in intel~national 'Haters ) and have thereby cree.ted 
a 'serious th1:eat to international peace ; and 
. 
Hhereas these attacks are part of a deliberate and systematic campaign 
of' aggression that the COE!lllUnisi: regime in N:)rth Vietnam has been "l-Taging 
against its neighbors and the nations joined ,·rlth them in the collective 
defense of their freedo~n j and 
. 
vlhereas the United States is assisting the peoples of southeast Asia to 
protect their freedom and has nO territorial) · military or politiccd 
ambitions in that area) but desires only that·these peoples should be 
left in peace to "\-Tork out their ml!1 destin:i.es in their 0'n'Yl ,·ray : NmT, 
therefore, be it 
Resolved by the Senate and House of Renres2ntatives of the Un:i.ted States 
of Arnerica in Congress asserllblcd, That the Con~ress 2.pprove 2Dd support 
I 
the determina.tion of the President, as Comme.nder in Chief, to take aJ.l 
necessary measures to repel any anned attack against the forces of the 
United States and to prevent further aggressioll . 
Sec . 2. 
The United St2.tes regards as vit2~1 to its nat i onal interest and 
to .Torlc1 peace the maintcEance of international peace and security in 
southeast ASia. 
Consonant .ii th the Constitution of the United St2.tes and 
the Charter of the United Nations 2.ud in accordance .Tith it obligations 
under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, the United States is) 
therefore) prepared, as tn2 Pre ~;ic1en t determines ) to take all nec ess[~r.f 
steps, including the use of anced force, to assist any member or protocol 
state of -:~ i.'.:: 
80i..:t~-:'::8. St Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance 
in defen se of i is freedo1'1 . 
Sec . 3. 
This resolution shall expire1vhen the President shall determine 
that the peace and. security of the aree. is ree.sorta8ly assured by 
international conditions created by action of the United Ne.tionsor 
othenrise , except' that it may be terminated earlier by concurrent 
r esolution of the Congress . 
Text of Putlic Lai{ 88-1~08 LH.J. R8S . 11\5_7, 78 Stat . 
381 ~ , approved 
Aug . 10) 1961~ . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"TI o S 
z 
o 
-of 
rn 
1 .. 
2. 
3· 
4. 
5· 
6. 
7· 
8. 
9· 
10. 
11. 
12. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECP~ - Sensitive 
FOOTNOTES 
Baltimore Sun) 22 May 1964 . 
On 6 and 7 June two U. S. Navy reconnaissance aircraft were shot 
dOlvn Over laos by commQl1ist groQl1d-fire . 
The United States requested 
and received permission to furnish armed escort reconnaissance 
f~ights) and on 9 June) U. S. aircraft struck Pathet lao gun posi-
tlons and damaged a Pathet lao headquarters . 
Souvanna Phouma 
temporarily ,rithdrew his permission for armed escort in response 
to vigorous DRV and Chinese protests) but renevred it on 12 June. 
See Baltimore Sun) 7) 9) 10) 13 June 1964. 
Also, New York Times, 
9, 10 June 1964 . 
. 
State/Defense message to Vientiane and Bangkok Embassies, 29 June 
1964 ( In Vietnam 381; 11-30 June 1964 file ) (SECRET) . 
See Baltimore Sun, 3 June 1964; New York Times, 7, 20, 23, 24 June 
1964 . 
New York Times, 21 June 1964. 
Ne,v York Times) 22 June 1964; 1--1a shington Post, 23 June 1961~. 
New York Times, 11 July 1964; New York Herald Tribune and Washington 
~, 9 June 1964 . 
Canadian delegation (Saigon ) message to U. S. Department of State, 
20 June 1964 ( in Vietnam 381: 11-30 June 1964) (TOP SECRET) . 
See Bundy memorandum to Secretary Rusk, "Highlights of Honolulu 
Conference) " 3 June 1964 (in State Department Materials) Vol. I) 
( SECRET). 
See also discussion in United States-Vietnam Relations) 
1945-196
cr, DT . C·5, "Military Pressures Against North Vietnam; 
Action 
and Debate, Feb- Jun 1964.)" pp . 34-35 (TOP SECRET). 
Robert Manning memorandum to President Johnson, "Informatj.on Program 
for Southeast Asia)" 16 June 1964 (in Vietnam 381; 11-30 June 1964) 
(TOP SECRET). 
NSAM 308) 22 June 1964 ( SECRET) . 
From "Pertinent Historical Background) Rules of Engagement--Southeast 
ASia, " (Undated) 1966) notes compiled by Assistant Secretary of 
Defense ( ISA) McNaughton ( j.n McNaughton VIII) (TOP SECRET). 
. 
Secretary McNamara, before Senate Foreign Relations Committee) 
20 February 1968) Hearing Before the COIT@ittee on_Foreign Relations, 
U. S. Senate, Ninetieth Congress, Second Session, vlith the Honorable 
Robert S. McNamara) Secretary of Defense on February 20, 1968 
{Washington: 
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1968)) p . 26. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
9-3 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
14 . 
Secretary McNamara) before Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services 
Committees) 6 August 1964 (in McNaughton VIII) (TOP SECRET). 
15· 
CJCS memorandum to SecDef) "North Vietnam Operations (S L II' 19 May 
1964 (JCSIvi 426- 64 ) (TOP SECRET). 
16. 
SACSA memoranda to SecDef) "Operations Against North Vietnam)" 
. 
13 June 1964; 1 July 1964; 28 July 1964 (in Vietnam 381: Sensitive 
File) (TOP SECRET). 
17. 
Rusk message to Vientiane Embassy) 26 July 19611· (State 89 ) ( in 
"Southeast Asia) June-July 1964) II CF 15 ) (TOP SECRET). 
See also) 
CJCS memorandum to SecDef) "u . s./G\TJ',T Combined Planning)" 24 June 
1964 (in Vietnam 381: 11- 30 June 1964) (TOP SECRET) . 
The internal 
policy of controversy on cross-border operations during the first 
half of 1964 i s described to some extent in United States-Vietnam 
Rel ations) IV. C. 5 . (TOP SECRET) . 
18. 
The specific recommendations appear in a McGeorge Bundy memorandum 
to Secretary Rusk) et . a1.) "Draft Basic Recommendation and Projected 
Course of Action on Southeast Asia)" 25 May 1964 (loll Attachment) (in 
State Department Material) Vol. I) (TOP SECREl') . 
The disposition of 
these recommendations is discussed in United States- Vietnam Relations) 
IV.C.5.) pp. 22-40 (TOP SECRET) . 
19· 
Proceedings of the Honolulu Conference) dealing with the question 
of pressures against North Vietnam) are discussed in United States-
Vietnam Relations) IV. C. 5.) pp. 28-34 (TOP SECRET). 
20. 
Secretary McNamara) op . cit .) 20 February 1968) pp . 9) 10, 15) 28 . 
See also Ted Sell in~he-washington Post) 8 August 1964 . 
21. ~) pp . 31, 32 . 
Assistant Secretary McNaughton) ' before the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee) "Tonkin Gulf InCident) August 2 and 4) 
1964," 23 May 1966 (in McNaughton VIII) (TOP SECRET) . 
See also U.S. 
Navy chronology in Neu York Times ) 4 August 1964 and officially 
released accounts in the New York Times, 9 and 10 January 1968. 
22. 
McNamara) op . cit .) 20 February 1968) pp . 10, 13; McNaughton) 
op. Cit.) Edwin L. Dale) Jr. ) Neu York Times) 4 August 1964. 
23· 
In New York Times) 4 August 1964. 
24. 
McNamara) op. Cit . ) 20 February 1968) IP ' 17) 18, 28 . 
. 25 · 
From "Proof of Attack) " notes compiled by Assistant Secretary 
McNaughton (in McNaughton VIII) (TOP SECRET) and McNamara ) op . cit .) 
20 February 1968) pp . 10) 15) 17) 35- 37 . 
TOP SECRET -
Sensitive 
26 . 
27 · 
28 . 
29· 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33 · 
34. 
35· 
36. 
37 · 
38 . 
39 · 
41. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Ibid. 
See also public accounts in New York Times and Baltimore 
Sun, 5 August 1964, in New York Herald Tribune, 9 August 1964, 
and in New York Times, 4 February 1968 . 
McNamara, Ope cit., 20 February 1968, pp. 17, 18, 57, 66, 92 . 
See 
also CTG ~2.1 to CINCPACFLT, 041452Z, 
0~~1515Z, 041542Z and 041727Z 
August 1964 (SECRET). 
McNamara, Op e cit . , 20 February 1968, pp . 10, 11, 48; see also 
chronology of the Tonkin crisis in New York Herald Tribune, 9 August 
1964. 
Quotat ion from Finney, Op e cit . , 10 January 1969 . 
Ibid., pp. ll, 89. 
Ibid., pp . 58-60, passim. 
See also CTG 72 .1 to CINCPACFLT 041727Z, 
04IB48z August 1964; JCS to CINCPAC, 042119Z August 1964 (JCS 7720 ) 
(TOP SECRET). 
Before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 20 February 1968. 
See accounts in the Ne,v York Times and The Washington Post, 5 August 
1964; also the Chronology, New York Herald Tribune, 9 August 1964 . 
Quotations from Secretary McNamara's testimony before Congressional 
Committees, 6 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
See also McNamara, Op e cit ., 
20 February 1968, pp . 14, 15, 26, 29-31 . 
See Paul W. Ward, Baltimore Sun, 6 August 1964 and James Reston, 
New York Times, 6 August 1964 . 
McNamara, Op e cit . , 20 February 1968, pp. 32 (The date given in the 
testimony is in error). 
Ibid . 
McNamara news conference, 5 August 1964, in New York Times, 6 August 
19G+ . 
See also JCS to CINCS, 050043Z 4 August 1964 (JCS 7729) (SECRET) . 
See Solbert memorandum to SecDef, "Alert Posture for Southeast Asia, " 
26 September 1964, approved by Secretary McNamara on that date (in 
Vietnam 381: September file) (TOP SECRET). 
See also JCS to CINCPAC 
and CINCSTRlKE/CINCMEA.FSA, 241630Z October 1964 (JCS 1177) (SECRET) . 
The Washi:qgton Post,6 August 1964. 
CongreSSional Record 
House of Representatives, 7 August 1964, pp. 
17954-17969, passim . ' 
Committee on Foreign Relations Report, "Promoting the Maintenance of 
International Peace and Security in Southeast Asia, " U.S. Senate, 
88th Cong- ::ss, 2nd SeSSion, 6 August 1964. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
42. 
44. 
46. 
48. 
49· 
50. 
51. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Floor debate on proposed Joint Congressional Resolution, U.S. 
Senate, 6 August 1964 . 
See United States -Vietnam Relations, IV.C.5·, pp. 26, 31, 38-40, 
for a di2cussion of the rationale behird. the initially proposed 
Congressional Resolution . 
Text in New York Times.> 6 August 1964. 
Verbatim text of message handed directly to Canadian Embassy, 
Washington, D.C., for transmittal to Mr . Seaborn. 
State Depart-
ment Drafting Office copy, 8 August 1964 (in State Department 
Materials, Vol I.) (TOP SECRET). 
See account of U.S. calculations and policy decision in early 
June 1964 in United States-Vietnam Relations, IV.C.5·, pp . 25-27, 
34-40, (TOP SECRET). 
Great BrHain and the Soviet Union (Geneva Co-Chairmen ); Canada, 
India and Poland (Members of the Geneva-appointed I.C.C.); and the 
tripartite Laotian government . 
See Ibid., p. 27· 
Henry Tanner, New York Times, 27 July 1964. 
Unger message to Secretary Rusk, 27 July 1964 (Vientiane 170) 
(in CF 15) (TOP SECRET). 
';{illiam Bundy, IIMemorandum on the Southeast Asia Situation, II 
12 June 1964 (in State Department Materials, Vol. I) ( SECRET). 
This vie\vpoint reflected in Department of State message to 
Vientiane, Saigon embassies and CINCPAC, 
ll~ August 1964 (State 439) 
(in IISoutheast Asia, August 1964, II CF 16) (TOP SECRET). 
52. 
The foregOing is available through public sources . 
See New York 
Times for the respective dates. 
53 . 
Bundy memorandum, 12 June 1964 (SECRET) . 
54. 
See Jack Langguth, New York Times, 31 July 1964.· 
55 . 
Unger to Rusk, 27 July 1964 (TOP SECRET ). 
56. 
Henry TaI'ner, New York Times, 2 August 1964 . . 
57. 
Department of State message to many addressees, 14 August 1964 (TOP 
SECRET). 
See also, Rusk message to Vientiane and other embassies, 
7 August 1961~ (State 136) (In IISoutheast Asia , August 196h, II CF 16) 
( SECRET ) . 
46 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
58. 
59· 
w. 
61. 
62 . 
64 . 
66. 
67. 
68. 
70. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Rusk to Vientiane) et. al.) 7 August 1964 ( SECRET). 
See New York Times) 9 and 21 August 1964; Christian Science 
Monitor) 10 August 1964. 
Rusk to Vientiene) et . al . ) 7 August 1964 (SECRET) . 
Compare l ast paragraph in Ibid . with argRments in Bundy memorandum) 
12 June 1964 (SECRET). 
Taylor message to Secretary Rusk) 9 August (Saigon 363) (in CF 16) 
(SECRET) . 
See ~; Rusk message to Vientiane) et . al .) 7 August 1964; CJCS 
memorandum to SecDef) "Next Courses of Action in Southeast Asia) " 
14 August 1964 (JCSM-701-64 ) (in Vietnam 381: August file ); CINCPAC 
message to JCS) IINext Courses of Action in Southeast Asia) II 17 August 
1961~ ( in CG 16) (TOP SECRET) . 
Taylor to Rusk) 9 August 1961i (SECRET). 
u.S. MisSion message to Department of State) 18 August 1964 
(Saigon 465) (in CF 16) (TOP SECRET). 
William Bundy me..rnorandum to SecDef et . al . ) "Next Courses of Action 
in Southeast ASia) II 11 August 1964) (in Vietnam 381: August file ) 
( SECRHI') . 
These viel-Ts were later expressed in a Department of State 
message to several addressees) requesting comments . 
C1NCPAC to JCS) 17 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
CJCS memorandum to SecDef 
"Recommended Courses of Action - Southeast 
ASia) " 26 August 1964 (JCSrvt-746-64) (TOP SECRET). 
See also JCSM-701- 64 . 
CINCPAC to JCS) 17 August 1964 (TOP SECRET ). 
See United States- Vietnam Relations) IV.C. 5.) pp . 35-36 (TOP SECRET). 
71. 
Excerpts from the Rostow thesis in t!Analysis of the Rostow ThesiS) " 
attachment to Rowen memorandum to JCS) et . a1. ) "The Rostow Thesis)" 
21 August 1964 (1-27278/64) (SECRET). 
72. ~ .) p . 2 (SECRET). 
'73 · 
Department of State to several addressees) 14 August 1964 (TOP SECRET).-
74. 
McNaughton letter to Assistant Secretary of State Bill1dy) 11 August 
1964 ( in Vietnam 381: August file ) (TOP SECRET) . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
75· 
76. 
77· 
78. 
79· 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83· 
84. 
85· 
86. 
87· 
. 88 . 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
CINCPAC message to JCS, "Rules of Engagement," 5 August 1964 
(in Vietnam 381: August file) (TOP SECRET). 
JCS message to CINCPAC:,"Rules of Engagement," 15 August 1964 
(JCS 7947) ( in Vietnam 381: August file) (TOP SECRET). 
COMUSMACV message to CINCPAC, "Cross-Border Operations, " 16 August 
1961+ (in CF 16) (TOP SECRET). 
CINCPAC message to JCS, "I.mmediate Actions to be taken in South 
Vietnam," 31 August 1964 (in Vietnam 381: August file) (TOP SECRET). 
"Ambassador Taylor I s Situation Report on the RVN, " attachment to 
SACSA memorandum to Colonel Alfred J. Moody, Military Assistant 
to SecDef, 14 August 1964 (in Vietnam 381: August file) (SECRET). 
See also Department of State to several addressees, 14 August 1964 
(TOP SECRET). 
Bureau of Intelligence and Research memorandum, Department of State, 
24 August 1961~ (in Department of State Materials, "Working Papers") 
(SECRET) . 
Taylor message to Department of State, 14 October 1964 (Saigon 1129) 
(in "Southeast Asia -- October 1964," CF 18) (TOP SECRET). 
The data 
reflected in this cable may have been assembled for "Infiltration 
Study, Viet Cong Forces, Republic of Viet Nam," attachment to MACV 
(Asst cis, Intelligence) letter to JCS, "Viet Cong Ll1filtration, " 
31 October 1964 (JCS 2343/490, 13 November 1964) (SECRET). 
Reported in JCSM-746-64 (TOP SECRET). 
Department of State to several addressees, 14 August 1961~ (TOP SECRET). 
Joint State/Defense message to Saigon Embassy, 20 August 1964 
(in CF 16) (SECRET ). 
JCSM-746-64, 26 August 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
Assistant Secretary McNaughton, "Plan of Action for South Vietnam" 
(2nd Draft), 3 September 1964 (in State Department Materials, Vol . II) 
(TOP SECRET). 
JCS Talking Paper for CJCS, "Next Courses of Action for RVN, " 
7 Septemb3r 1964 (in Vietnam 381: Sensitive files) (TOP SECRET) . 
Ibid., (TOP SECRET). 
Hand.iritten notes of the White House meeting, 7 September 1964 (SECRET) . 
. 48 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C?t/ 
o 
90 . 
91. 
92 . 
93 · 
94 . 
95· 
96. 
97 · 
98 . 
99 · 
100. 
101. 
102 . 
103 · 
104 . 
105· 
106 . 
107· 
108. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Wi lliam Bundy memorandum to SecDef) et . al . ) "Courses of Action 
of Action for South Vietnam) " 8 September 1964 (in Vietnam 381: 
August file ) (SECRET). 
McNaughtoll) "Plan of Action for South V~etnam) " (TOP SECREr). 
Bundy memo) 8 September 1964 (SECRET ). 
Ibid . ) (SECRET). 
Hand\vritten notes (SECRET). 
Ibid . 
Bundy memo) 8 September 1964 (SECRET). 
White House memorandum to SecState and SecDef) "National Securi ty 
Action Memorandum No . 314)" 10 September 1964 ( NSAM 314) (in 
Vietnam 381: September file ) (TOP SECRET ). 
CTU 77 .6/ 6 message to COMUSMACV) 
flAmplifying Report on DE SOTO 
181327g SITREP) " 18 September 1964 (in McNaughton VIII ) (SECRET). 
NSC Working Group I-Torking Paper ) Part VIII) "Immediate Actions i n 
the Period Prior to Decision)" 7 November 1964 (in State Department 
Materials) Vol II ) (TOP SECRET). 
Vance memorandum to Assistant Secretary McNaughton) 30 September 
1964 . 
See also L. Thompson letter to Deputy Secretary Vance) 
25 September 1964 (Both in Vietnam 381: September fil e ) (SECRET). 
Taylor message to SecState) Section One) 19 September 1964 (Saigon 
913 ) (in Vietnam 381: September file ) (TOP SECRET). 
Taylor to SecState) Section Tlvo) 19 September 1964 (TOP SECREr). 
Ibid . 
Vientiane Embassy message to Sec State (Vientiane 448 )) described 
i n Section One) 19 September 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
Section T\·ro ) 19 September 1961~ (TOP SECRET). 
CJCS memcrandu..m to SecDef) "Cross- Border Operations)" 30 September 
1964 (JCSM-835-64) (TOP SECRET). 
Joint State/Defense message to Vientiane Embassy) 6 October 1964 
(State 313) ( in "Southeast Asia) September 1964)" C}!' 17) (TOP SECRET ). 
SNIE 10-3-64) "Probable Communist Reactions to Certain Possible 
U.S./GVN Courses of ActiQn) " 9 October 1961+) p . 6 (TOP SECREt' ). 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
109· State/Defense to Vientiane) 6 October 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
110. Unger message to Secretary Rusk and McNamara) .13 October 1964 
(Vientiane 609 ) (in Vietnam 381: October file) (TOP SECRET). 
111. Taylor message to Secretary Rusk) 9 October 1964 (Saigon 1068 ) 
(in "Southeast Asia - October 1964)" CF 18) TOP SECRET). 
112. NSC Working Group Working Paper) Part VIII) 7 November 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
113· Henry Kamm) New York Times) 3 and 8 September 1964. 
114 . Drew Middleton) New York Times) 16) 17) 18 and 22 September 1964 . 
115· Unger message to Department of State) 17 August 1964 (Vientiane 
310) ( in CF 16) (TOP SECRET) . 
. 
116. Bundy memo to SecDef et . al .) 11 August 1964 (SECRET). 
For evidence of recognition by the Vientiane Embassy of the intent 
of U.S. policies) see Unger to Department of State) 17 August 1964 
(TOP SECRET) . 
. 
li7· Ambassador Unger) in intervie\v vlith the writer) 6 March 1967 
(CONFIDENTLAL) . 
118. Bundy memo) 11 August 1964 (SECRET). 
119. Ibid . 
120 . U.S. Mission (Saigon) to Department of State) 18 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
121. Rostow letter to Ambassador Taylor) 23 September 1964) attachment 
to a Rostmr memorandum to Secretary McNamara, 23 September 1964 
(in Vietnam 381: September file) (SECRET) . 
122 . See United States - Vietnam Relations) IV.C.5.) pp . 25-26 (TOP SECRh~ ). 
123· Taylor message to White House) 10 August 19@~ (Saigon 364 ) (in CF 16) 
(TOP SECRET). 
See also Rusk message to Saigon Embassy) 20 AugUst 1964 
(State 481 ) (in CF 16) (SECRET) . . 
. .  
124. Bund y memo to SecDef . et . a1., 11 August 1964; Department of State 
to several addressees: 14 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
125 · Department of State to several addressees) 14 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
The working paper omitted the phrase) "for planning purposes ." 
126. Bundy to SecDef) et . al ., 11 August 1964 (SECRET). 
50 
'I'OP SECRET - Sensitive 
. /06 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
127 · U. S. Mission (Saigon ) to Department of State, 18 August 1964 
(TOP SECRET) . 
128 . McNaughton, 
frPlan of Action for South Vietnam, fr (TOP SECRET ). 
129 · Bundy memo, 8 September 1964 (SECRET). 
130 . ~ .; see also NSAM 314, 10 September 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
131. See Joint State/Defense message to Ambassador Taylor, 29 October 
1964 (State 937 ) (in CF 18 ) (TOP SECRET). 
132 . IISummaryll in IIAnalysis of the Rostow Thesi s, II pp . 2- 3 ( SECRET). 
133· Ibid . , p . 2 ( SECRET). 
134 . ~ 
.. , pp . 3- 4 (SECRET). 
135 
IIAn 1 
. 
II 
4 24 
25 
(S CR 
) 
. 
a YSlS of the Rostow Thesis, 
pp . 13-1, 
, 
, 
E 
ET . 
136. "Summaryll. 
Ib 'd 
5 
In _ l_. , p . 
. 
1 37 · CJCS memorandum to SecDef, IICourses of Action for South Vietnam, II 
9 September 1964 (CM-124-64 ) (in Vietnam 381: 
September file ). 
See 
also, CINCPAC to JCS) 17 August 1964 (TOP SECRET ). 
138 . JCSM-7lf6-64, 26 August ' 1964; CJCS Talking Paper) 7 September 1964; 
CM-124-64; CM-124-64) 9 September 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
139 · McNaughton memorandum to Secretary McNamara , "Air Force Study on 
Tactical Air Capability in Southeast Asia, II 8 August 1961t (in Vietnam 
381: 
August file ); if~CV 150123~ and CINCPAC 18231lt~ , in William 
Bundy memorandum) "Issues Concerning Next Courses of Action,lI 
25 August 1964, Items G and H (in State Department Materials, Book I ); 
CINCPAC to JCS, 17 August 1964; CJCS memorandum to SecDef, "Improve-
ment of U. S . Security Posture in South Vietnam) " 2lt August 1964 ( JCSM-
731-64 ); CJCS memorandum to SecDef, IIAir Force Tactical Air Relation-
ships Study (Southeast Asia ), II It September 1964 ( JCSM- 763- 64 ) (TOP 
SECRET) . 
l ltO . JCSM- 701-64 , llt August 1964; CINCPAC to JCS ) 17 August 1964; JCSM-
7lt6- 64, 26 August 1964; CJCS Talking Paper, 7 September 1964 (TOP 
SECREr) . 
llt1- Saigon ltS7 and Saigon 538 cited in Bun(1.y memo, 25 August 1964; 
u. S. Mission ( Saigon) to Department of State) 18 August 1964 
(TOP SECRET) . 
llt2 . U. S o MiSSion to Depart ment of State, JB August 1964; Bundy memo, 
25 August 1964; HandT.orritten notes, 7 September 1964 (TOP SECRET ). 
51 
TOP SECRET 
Sensiti 'Fe 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
143· UoS. Mission to Department of State)J6 August 1964; Handwritten 
notes) 7 September 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
144 . Bundy memo) 25 August 1964; McNaughton draft ) "Aims and Options in 
Southeast Asia)" 13 October 1964 (in "Drafts 1965) " McNaughton I I ) 
(TOP SECRET). 
145 · Penciled notes on Bundy memo to SecDef) et . al . ) 11 August 1964; 
McNaughton, op . cit . ; McNaughton) "Plan of Action for South Vietnam, " 
3 September 1964 (TOP SECRET) . 
146. McNamara memorandum to CJCS) "JCSM- 729- 64 : 
Target Study - North 
Vietnam (SECRET)," 31 August 1964 (in Vietnam 381: August file ); 
McNaughton) "Plan of Action for South Vietnam) " 3 September 1964; 
McNaughton draft) 13 October 1964 (TOP SECRET). 
147. ROche memorandum to JCS) "Draft Scenarios for Recommendation 12 
(NSAM 288 ))" 14 August 1964 ( in Vietnam 381: 
August file ); McNaughton) 
"Plan of Action for South Vietnam) " 3 September 1964; Bundy draft 
memorandum "Courses of Action for South Vietnam)" (undated) l-lith 
penciled notations ) (in' Vietnam 381: 
September file ) (TOP SECRET ). 
148 . McNaughton to McNamara) 8 August 1964; Hitch memorandum to Secretary 
McNamara) "Reviel.T of USAF Study: 
Relationships of Tactical Air 
to Ground Forces) SEA; 1964 and 1969 (U») " 24 August 1964 (in Vietnam 
381: 
August file ); McNamara memorandum to CJCS) "Improvement of U. S . 
Sccurity Posture in South Vietnam)" 31 August 1964 (in Vietnanl 381: 
August file ) (TOP SECRET) . 
149 . Department of State to several addressees) 14 August 1964; Bundy 
memo) 25 August 1964; Handlvritten notes) 7 September 196L~ (TOP SECRET). 
150 . NSAM 314) 10 September 1964; Joint State/Defense to Taylor) 29 October 
1964 (TOP SECRET). 
151. See McNaughton to McNamara ) 8 August 1964; also) Department of State 
t o several addressees ) 14 August 1964; Bundy memo) 8 September 1964) 
parti cularly in comparison "rith Bundy draft memo (undated) with 
pencil notes ) (SECRET) . 
152 . SNIE 10-3-64) 9 October 1964) pp. 5) 6 (TOP SECRET). 
153 · ~) pp . 9-11 (TOP SECRb~ ). 
154 . Ibid . ) pp . 11-12 (TOP SECRET) . 
155· Ibid .) p . 2; Handvlritten notes) 7 September 1964; SNlE 53-2- 64) 
"The Situation in South Vietnam)" 1 October 1964) p . 1 (TOP SECRET ). 
52 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
