Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET .
SECURITY INFORMATION

economy, and increase Japan's dependence on United States aid,
In the long run the loss of Southeast Asia, especially Malaya
and Indonesia, could result in such economic and political
pressures in Japan as to make it extremely difficult to pre-
vent Japan's eventual accommodation to the Soviet Bloc.

kh, Southeast Asia, especially Malaya and Indonesia, is
tne: principal world source of natural rubber and tin. Access
to these materials by the Western Powers and their denial to
the Soviet Bloc is important at all times and particularly in
the event of global war. Communist control over the rice
surpluses of the Southeast Asian mainland would provide the
USSR with a powerful economic weapon in its relations with
other countries of the Far Eest. Indonesia is a secondary
source of petroleum whose importance would be enhanced by the
denial to the Western Powers of petroleum sources in the Middle
East. Malaya is the largest net dollar earner for the United
Kingdom, and its loss would seriously aggravate the economic
problems facing the UK.

5. Communist control of all of Southeast Asia would ren-
der the United States position in the Pacific offshore island
chain precarious and would seriously jeopardize fundamental
United States security interests in the Far East. The exten-
sion of communist power via Burma would augment the communist
threat to Indie and Pakistan and strengthen the groups within

those countries which favor accommodation. However, such an

event would probably result in a stiffer attitude toward
communism on the part of the Indian government.

6. Communist domination of mainland Southeast Asia would
place unfriendly forces astride the most direct and best-
developed sea end air routes between the Western Pacific and
India and the Near East. In the event of global war, the
development of Soviet submarine and air bases in mainland
Southeést Asis might compel the detour of U.S. and allied

shioping end air transportation in the Southeast Asia region

via considerably longer alternate routes to the south. This
extension of friendly lines of communication would hamper U.S.
strategic movements in this region and tend to isolate the
major non-communist bases in the Fer East--the offshore island
chain and Australia--from existing bases -in East Africa and

.the Near and Middle East, as well as from potential bases on

the Indian sub-continent.

7. Besices disrupting established linss of communication
in the area, the denial of actual military facilities in main-
land Southeast Asia--in particular, the loss of the major naval
operating bases at Singepore--would compel the utilization of

ANNEX TO NSC 124 . _ TOP SECRET

L639
