6 ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Negotiations had been taking place between Vice President Tho's
committee and the Buddhists since June 5, with considerable acrimonious
public questioning of good faith by both sides. After the suicide, the
U.S. intensified its already considerable pressure on the government to
mollify the Buddhists, and to bring the deteriorating political situa-
tion under control. Finally, on June 16, a joint GVN-Buddhist communique
was released outlining the elements of a settlement, but affixing no
responsibility for the May 6 incident. Violent suppression by the GVN
of rioting the next day, however, abrogated the spirit of the agreement.
The Nhus, for their part, immediately undertook to sabotage the agreement
by secretly calling on the GYN~sponsored youth organizations to denounce
it. By late June, it was apparent that the egreement was not meant as
& genuine gesture of conciliation by Diem, but was only an effort to
appease the U.S. and paper over a steadily widening fissure in internal
politics,

The evident lack of faith on the part of the government in the
dune 16 agreement discredited the conciliatory policy of moderation that
the older Buddhist leadership had followed until that time. In late
June, leadership of the Buddhist movement passed to a younger, more
radical set of monks, with more far-reaching political objectives. They
made intelligent and skillful political use of a rising tide of popular
support, Carefully planned mass meetings and demonstrations were accom-
panied with an aggressive press campaign of opposition to the regime.
Seizing on the importance of American news media, they cultivated U,S.
newsmen, tipped them off to demonstrations and rallies, and carefully
timed their activities to get maximum press coverage. Not surprisingly,
the Ngo family reacted with ever more severe suppression to the Buddhist
activists, and with acrimonious criticism and even threats to the American
newsmen.

Early in July, Vice President Tho's committee announced that a
preliminary investigation of the May 8 incident had confirmed that the
deaths were the result of an act of Viet Cong terrorism. Outraged, the
Buddhists denounced the findings and intensified their protest activities.
On July 19, under U.S, pressure, Diem made a brief two-minute radio
address, ostensibly an expression of conciliation to the Buddhists, but
so written and coldly delivered as to destroy in advance any effect its
announced minor concessions might haye had.

Within the regime, Nhu and his wife were severely criticizing Diem
for caving in under Buddhist pressure, Mme. Nhu publicly ridiculed the
Buddhist suicide as a "barbecue," accused the Buddhist leaders of being
infiltrated with communists, and construed the protest movement as Viet
Cong inspired. Both Whu end his wife worked publicly and privately to
undermine Diem's feeble efforts at compromise with the Buddhists, and
rumors that Nhu was considering a coup against his brother began to
circulate in July.

A.U.S. Special National Intelligence Estimate on July 10 concluded
with the perceptive prediction that if the Diem regime did nothing to
implement the June 16 agreement and to appease the Buddhists, the

6 TOP SECRET -. Sensitive
