Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recognizing that there was no longer an effective ARVN chain of command
because of the irresponsible game of musical chairs among the top leadership,
the estimate cautioned that the Vietnamese generals would accept integrated
command only to the extent that the United States contributed troops; and

it advised against U.S, commitment to any rigid arrangement because GVN

and RVNAI had not achieved sufficient political and military maturity.

MACV omitted further discussion of the function or authority of such inte-
grated staffs. When command arrangements were covered in the detailed
description of the most likely course of action, the intent was clear.

U.S. commanders would control American troops except in certain clearly
defined zones within which they would also be responsible for "controlling
and coordinating” operations of both U.S. and RVN forces. A collateral
function envisioned for each U.S. division command was that of Deputy Command
Support to the ARVN Corps Commander. 18/

4. The Rise and Decline of Encadrement, April, 1964

Ambassador Taylor returned to Washington in late March and was
present at the April 1-2 NSC meeting at which General Johnson's 21 recom-
mendations and Taylor's 41. points were approved. 19/ Almost 4s soon as
Taylor returned to Saigon wide differences of opinion developed on what
should happen next,

The State/Defense "7 point message" of April 15 to Ambassador Taylor
and General Westmoreland set the pot boiling, following Westmoreland's urgent
request via military channels for more forces. The message directed:

(1) Experimental encadrement of U.S. troops into RVNAF. -

(2) The introduction of a brigade force into Bien Hoa/ Vung Tau
for security and later counterinsurgency.

(3) The introduction of several additional U.S. battalions
into coastal enclaves.

(4) Expansion of Vietnamese recruiting, using proven U.S.
technicues.

(5) Expansion of the MEDCAP program using mobile dispensaries.

(6) Experimentation in 2 or 3 provinces with a team of U.S.
civil affairs personnel.

(7) Supplement of low RVNAF pay through provision of a food
ration, 20/

Taylor objected to the new forces, to encadrement, and to the
whole tone of the 7 point message. He sent two principal messages with
these objections, one setting out a reasoned comment on the message and
a second, personal to McGeorge Bundy, saying how he really felt about it:

"TJ am greatly troubled by DOD 1523397 April 15. First,
it shows no consideration for the fact that, as a result of

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
