Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

The most basic of these questions is whether the U.S. can in any
way serve as a makeweight sufficient to change the continuing unfavor~
able trend of the war in South Vietnam? Can it, that is, overcome the
apparent fact that the Viet Cong have "captured'’ the Vietnamese
nationalist movement while the GVN has become the refuge of Vietnamese
who were allied with the French in the battle against the independence
of their nation? Attempts to answer this question are complicated, of
course, by the difficult issue of Viet Cong allegiance to and control
by Communist China, But this is the nature of the situation. The issue
of whether the U.S. can energize the GVN has been too long submerged by
repeated assertions that it must do so.

A part of any tentative answer to this fundamental question will
turn on the issue of how the U.S. might better promote a more adequate
pace of GVN reform and improved RVNAF effectiveness to cope with the
VC/NVA threat. (A related question, of course, is whether reform and
increased effectiveness can proceed simultaneously.) Asking this ques~
tion would open for examination two aspects of the advisory program that
have come to be treated by reflexive response: where are advisors needed
and what should be the relationship of the advisor to the advised?

The continuing U.S. unstated assumption has been that more advisors
somehow equate to better performance. This can be traced in the success~
ive expansions of the military advisory effort -~ first to the provinces
and down to battalion level within ARVN, then to the districts, and most
recently to the paramilitary forces within RVNAF. It may be that large
numbers of advisors are, in fact, the best way to influence events but
one cannot reach such a conclusion validly without first asking the
question.

The relationship of advisor to advised has gone through recurrent
changes relative to judging an advisor's performance according to the
performance of his counterpart. It has almost never deviated, however,
from the belief that the conscious and continuing use of leverage at
many levels would undercut Vietnamese sovereignty and stultify the
development of Vietnamese leadership. Given the results of this policy
over a number of years it is fair to ask whether the stick ought not to
be more routinely used in combination with the carrot. Again, the answer
is not obvious but it is obvious that there can be no sound answer in
the absence of inquiry.

Finally, and closely related to any examination of the leverage
issue, there is the question of the adequacy of counterinsurgent theory
and doctrine. The progression from physical security through the es-
tablishment of socially oriented programs (political and economic) to
the objective of earning and winning popular allegiance seems both
simple and logical. It may also be simplistic, for its transformation
into operational reality bumps head-on into some very difficult questions.
Is security a precondition to loyalty, for instance, or must some degree
of loyalty be realized as a precondition to intelligence information

1x TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
