Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive

will continue to be deployed on the basis of the "December 11,
1965 Plan"). I would like to urge that you use all the in-
genuity you can in developing suggested ways of meeting these
conditions by use of suitable substitutes, civilian contractor
personnel, etc. In this connection, General Westmoreland and
Admiral Sharp have made a list of suggestions which is being
analyzed by the JCS J-4 and my staff. Every effort should be
made to carry out these and similar suggestions.

fhe fourth line in the tables is my understanding of the
current Service estimates of their capabilities to meet these
requirements under the assumption that only cadres are taken
from Europe, and that no Reserves or extensions of terms of
Service are utilized. Would you please study these estimates,
improve upon them, and find ways to bring our effective combat
capability into equality with the Case 1.

I would like by February 28 the individual Service and JCS
comments on our capabilities to meet Case 1 requirements. 53

G. Phase ITA(R) Presented
1. The JCS Recommendation

On 1 March 1966, the Joint Chiefs of Staff forwarded their
recommendation for Phase IJA(R) and their plan to reconstitute the
draw-downs on our strategic reserve. 54/ The JCS recommended that the
43~2/3 battalion U.S. force be deployed to Vietnam in CY 1966, which
would require a "selective call-up of reserve units and personnel and
extension of terms of service." They also considered, at the request
of the Secretary of Defense, a variation of Case 1, in which reserve
call-up and extension of terms of service were excluded. They recom-
mended against this plan because of the severe effects upon our combat
effectiveness in Europe. If the reserves were not to be called or terms
of service extended, the JCS recommended that the deployments for Phase
ITA(R) be extended into 1967 rather than attempt to complete them by the
end of 1966. Their plan was basically to delay the deployment of 13 of
the scheduled 37 Army maneuver battalions until the first half of 1967
(7 the first quarter and 6 the second quarter). The battalions then-
selves would be ready for deployment by 1 January 1967, but the necessary
combat service support units would not be.

2. McNamara Directs Another Try

liowevex, the JCS's recommendations were not bought by the Sec-
retary of Defense and on 10 March he stated, "I have reviewed JCSM 130-66
and the related memorandums from the Secretary of the Military Departments.
All of these require more study and review. However, until such studies
are completed, you should plan to deploy forces to SVN in accordance

38 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
