Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

devoted a major portion of the review to the Vietnam problem. In his
valedictory on February 1, 1968 (just after the beginning of Tet) he
offered a far more sober appraisal of the effectiveness of the bombing
than the military commanders in the field. In it he drew on much of

the analysis provided to him the previous fall by the JASON and SRACABIN
studies and his own systems analysts. His estimate of the bombing is
perhaps the closest to being realistic ever given by the Administration
and was a wise and tempered judgment to offer in the face of the enemy's
impressive Tet attacks.

The air campaign against North Vietnam has ineluded
attacks on industrial facilities, fixed military targets,
and the transportation system.

Attacks against major industrial facilities through
1967 have destroyed or put out of operation a large portion
of the rather limited modern industrial base. About 70 per-
cent of the North's electric generating capacity is currently
out of operation, and the bulk of its fixed petroleum stor-
age capacity has been destroyed. However, (imported diesel
generators are probably producing sufficient electricity
for essential services and, by dispersing their petroleum
supplies, the North Vietnamese have been able to meet
their minimum petroleum needs. Most, if not all, of the
industrial output lost has been replaced by imports from
the Soviet Union and China.

Military and economic assistance from other Communist
countries, chiefly the Soviet Union, has been steadily
increasing. In 1965, North-Vietnam received in aid a total
of $420 million ($270 million military and $150 million
economic); in 1966, $730 million ($455 million military and
$275 million economic); and preliminary estimates indicate
that total aid for 1967 may have reached $1 billion ($660
million military and $340 million economic). Soviet mili-
tary aid since 1965 has been concentrated on air defense
materiel -- SAM's, AAA guns and ammo, radars, and fighter
aircraft.

Soviet economic assistance has included trucks, rail-
road equipment, barges, machinery, petroleum, fertilizer,
and food. China has provided help in the construction of
light industry, maintenance of the transportation system
and improvements in the communications and irrigation sys-
tems, plus some 30,000 to 50,000 support troops for use
in North Vietnam for repair and AAA defense.

Damage inflicted by our air attacks on fixed military
targets has led to the ebandonment of barracks and supply

135 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
