Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

+o the President he outlined his current views as to further escalation
of the air war (in the initiation of which he had had a large hand in
1965) and further troop increments for the g-ound war in the South:

Since the Communist turndown of our latest offers in
February, there has been an intensification of bombing in
the North, and press reports suggest that there will be
further pressure for more attacks on targets heretofore
immune. There is also obvious pressure from the military
for further reinforcements in the South, although General West-
roreland has been a model of discipline in his public pro-
nouncements. One may guess, therefore, that the President
will soon be confronted with requests for 100,000-200,000
more troops and for authority to close the harbor in Haiphong.
Such recommendations @re inevitable, in the framework of
strictly military analysis. It is the thesis of this paper
that in the main they should be rejected, and that as a
matter of high national policy there should be a publicly
stated ceiling to the level of American participation in
Vietnam, as long as there is no further marked escalation on
the enemy side.

‘There are two major reasons for this recommendation:
the situation in Vietnam and the situation in the United
States. As to Vietnam, it seems very doubtful that further
intensifications of bombing in the North or major increases
in U.S. troops in the South are really a good way of bringing
the war to a satisfactory conclusion. As to the United
States, it seems clear that uncertainty about the future
size of the war is now having destructive effects on the
national will. 75

Unlike the vocal critics of the Administration, Mac Bundy was not opposed
to the bombing per se, merely to any further extension of it since he
felt such action would be counter-productive. Because his views carry
such weight, his arguments against extending the bombing are reproduced
below in full:

On the ineffectiveness of the bombing as’a means to
end the war, I think the evidence is plain -- though I would
defer to expert estimators. Ho Chi Minh and his colleagues
simply are not going to change their policy on the basis of
losses from the air in North Vietnam. No intelligence
estimate that I have seen in the last two years has ever
claimed that the bombing would have this effect. The
President never claimed that it would. The notion that
this was its purpose has been limited to one school of
thought and has never been the official Government position,
whatever critics may assert.

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
