Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The large RF/PF advisory element in this request included spaces for
82h RF Company Advisory Teams of two men each and 119 Company Training
Teams of five men each. Before returning to Washington, the Secretary
gave planning authorization for a U.S. augmentation not to exceed
525,000 spaces, but fulfilling Westmorelend's lower alternative by
civilianizing an additional 10,000 military spaces. 212/ A month
iater, after approval by President Johnson, this new force level was
promulgated as Program #5. 213/ The final detailed troop list for
Program #5 submitted by the JCS on September 15 contained, in addition
to the regular advisory spaces already mentioned, @ 666-man Special
Forces augmentation to perform advisor-like functions with their Viet-
namese counterparts. 21)/

Even before the Program #5 troop list was completed by MACV and
submitted by the JCS, however, Ambassador Komer was complaining that
the CORDS advisory element actual strength was seriously below its
authorization and that bureaucratic delays had forestalled even the
deployment of the 100 priority advisors requested in July. 215/ The
following day, OSD Systems Analysis advised Secretary McNamara that the
shortfall in the actual strength of the overall advisory complement was
a longstanding problem. In March, the advisory program had been under-
strength 600 men while MACV headquarters exceeded its authorization by
473. In response to Systems Analysis prodding this discrepancy had been
partially rectified, but as late as July the advisory staff was still
short 237 while MACV had an overage of 130. Systems Analysis further
advised the Secretary that while total strength authorizations had been
made, MACV's delay in submitting deteiled lists of grades and specialties
of desired personnel had, in turn, engendered delays at this end in
filling the billets. Moreover, the requirement that advisors receive
preliminary Stateside background and language training further delayed
the actual deployments. Only priority requests could be filled very
rapidly, and these necessarily could only constitute a small percentage
of the total.

In order to study the problems presented by the anticipated expan-
sion of RF/PF and to plan for the significant expansion of the U.S.
advisory effort to these forces, MACV convened a conference on Rr/Pr
matters on 26 October for all interested elements of MACV and USARV. 216/
The conference recommended a complete reorientation of the advisory con~
cept for RI/PF. Rather than assigning teams to RF companies and PF
platoons on a permanent basis, the conferees recommended the establish-
ment of 354 seven-man Mobile Advisory Teams (MATs) to be used on a
rotating basis under the direction of the Province Advisor to whom they
would be assigned. Further, the conference recommended the deployment
of an Engineer Advisor to each province, &n S-1 advisor to all provinces
without one, increasing the Administrative and Direct Support Logistics
(ADSL) companies from three to seven, and creating 7 seven-man Mobile

ail TOP SECRET - Sensitive
