Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The incremental annual cost of the conflict amounted ‘to $9.4 billion
in FY66 and is estimated at $19.7 billion for FY67. If in FY68 the
forces and rates of operations stabilized at the levels shown in this
paper, the cost will be about $2 billion, calculated as follows:

($ Billions)

Military Personnel le ‘ $ 5.5
Operations and Maintenance GO. 7
Ammunition Consumption 4.5
Aircraft & Helicopter Attrition Li
Other Procurement 4.3
Free World Force Support ° 1.5
‘Construction <2.
2) Th

These data exclude economic aid to Vietnam and other SE Asia nations
that might be attributed to the conflict. Economic aid for SVN currently
is running at about $.7 billion per year.

I. MILITARY STRATEGY IN VIETNAM

The war in Vietnam hes two highly interdependent parts: (1) the
"regular" war against the main force Wee battalions and regiments, and
the interdiction of their men and supplies flowing down from North Vietnam,
and (2) the "Pacification" cr revolutionary development war to neutralize
the local VC guerrillas and gain the permanent support of the SVN population,

The infiltrated men and supplies serve to bolster the regular units
whose function is to support the local VC guerrillas and infrastructure by
defeating the GVN forces in the area and generally exposing the GYN's ina-
bility to protect the rural populace. The local guerrilias and infrastruc-
ture maintain a constant VC presence in their area and support the offensive
efforts of the regular units by providing intelligence, terrain guidance,
supplies, and recruits. In addition, the guerrillas conduct many of the
thousands of incidents of terror, harassment, and sabotage reported each
month. The principal task of U.S. military forces in SVN must be to elimi-
nate the offensive capability of the resular units in order to allow the
GVN to counter the muerrilla forces and extend permanent control over areas
from which resular units have been cleared. (se

We now face a choice of two approaches to the threat of the regular
vc/NVA forces. The first approzch would be to continue in 1967 to in-
crease friendly forces as rapidly as possible, and without limit, and
employ them primarily in large-scale “seek out and destroy’ operations
to destroy the main force VC/NVA units.

108 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
