Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. A. U.S. MILITARY PLANNING AND DIPLOMATIC MANEUVER, JANUARY-JULY 1954

SUMMARY

It is charged that the U.S. tried to sabotage the Geneva Conference,
first by maneuvering to prevent the conference from taking place, then by
attempting to subvert a settlement, and finally, by refusing to guarantee
the resulting agreements of the conference. The documentation on this
charge is complete, but by no means unambiguous. While "sabotage" may be
a strong word, it is evident that the U.S. by its actions and statements
during this period did seek to down-play the conference, disassociate
itself from the results, and thereby did cast doubt on the stability of
the accords.

After the Big Four Conference at Berlin in February, 1954, U.S. efforts
were directed at preventing a French collapse in Vietnam prior to a settle-
ment at Geneva. If the conference were to take place, the U.S. believed
that any settlement likely to result would be contrary to U.S. interests.
The U.S. aim was, therefore, to take the emphasis off the conference and
put it back onto the battlefield. This renewed emphasis on a military
approach was put in the context of what Washington referred to as “united
action," of the same character as UN intervention in Korea -- broad, multi-
lateral, and military. Even as the French-Vietnamese military position
continued to deteriorate on the battlefield, the U.S. became more convinced
than ever of the need for decisive military victory. The recent experience
of Korea only served to convince Washington that meaningful compromise with
the communists was impossible. The U.S., however, did have to react to
French proposals for a peace conference, and did so by insisting on a
strong French stand, bolstered by continued fighting while negotiations
were in progress. Moreover, the U.S. threatened to "disassociate" itself
from the conference if the results were not favorable to the West (Tab 1).

As the conference became more of a reality, the U.S. aim was to keep
the united action option open in the event thet France would find the
course of nepotiations at Geneva unpalatable. Washington was convinced
that the conference would fail because of communist intransigence and that,
therefore, France would have no choice but to turn to the united action
alternative. France wanted U.S. military support, but was reluctant to
pay its price. The price was U.S. insistence on complete independence
for the Associated States of Indochina as soon as possible. The U.S.
would make no pledges to France, moreover, without firm and broad allied
support -- support which was never forthcoming on the military side.
France, unwilling to accept the prerequisites for U.S. intervention, and
under domestic pressure, decided to pursue a political settlement at the
conference table rather than united military action. Nevertheless, France
used these U.S. conditions and the united action option as a lever at the
conference. When the French situation in Indochina deteriorated beyond

A-1 TOP SECRET-Sensitive
