Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Impact of Korean Armistice

Second, the armistice in Korea created apprehension that the
Chinese Communists would now turn their attention to Indochine. President
Eisenhower warned in a speech on April 16, 1953, that any armistice in
Korea that merely released armed forces to pursue an attack elsewhere
would be a fraud. Secretary Dulles continued this theme after the Korean
armistice in a speech on September 2, 1953, on the war in Indochina. After
noting that "a single Communist aggressive front extends from Korea on the
north to Indochina in the south" he said:

"Commanist China has been and now is training, equipping
and supplying the Communist forces in Indochina. There is
the risk that, as in Korea, Red China might send its own Army
into Indochina. The Chinese Communist regime should realize
that such a second aggression could not occur without grave
consequences which might not be confined to Indochina. I say
this soberly...in the hope of preventing another aggressor
miscalculation." 12/

Underlying these warnings to China was the belief that the dif-
ference between success or failure in avoiding a takeover of all Vietnam
by Ho Chi Minh probably depended upon the extent of Chinese assistance
or direct participation. Signaling a warning to China was probably
designed to deter further Chinese involvement. Implicit in the signals
was the threat that if China came into the war, the United States would
be forced to follow suit, preferably with allies but, if necessary, alone.
Furthermore, the Eisenhower Administration implied that in keeping with
its policy of massive retaliation the United States would administer a
punishing nuclear blow to China without necessarily involving its land
forces in an Asian war.

6. Deepening of U.S. Commitment to Containment

In addition to the new mood in Washington created by the strategic
perceptions of a new Administration and the Korean armistice, the Viet Minh
invasion of Laos in the spring of 1953 and the deepening war weariness in
France served to strengthen those who favored a more assertive policy in
Indochina. The United States rushed supplies to Laos and Thailand in
May 1953 and provided six C-119's with civilian crews for the airlift
into Laos. 13/ It increased substantially the volume and tempo of
American military assistance to French Union forces. For fiscal year
1954, $460 million in military assistance was planned. Congress only
appropriated $400 million, but following the presentation by the French
of the Navarre Plan an additional $385 million was decided upon by the
NSC. 1/ No objection was raised when France asked our views in August,
1953, on the transfer of its battalion in Korea to Indochina and subse-
quently took this action. 15/ The Navarre Plan, by offering a format for
victory which promised success without the direct involvement of American
military forces, tended, because of its very attractiveness, to have the
effect of enlarging our commitment to assist the French towards achieving
a military solution.

A-50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
