Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"For these reasons, we, members of the Provisional Government,
representing the whole Vietnamese people, declare that from now
on we break off all relations of a colonial character with France};
we repeal all the international obligation that France has so far
subscribed to on behalf of Viet-Nam, and we abolish all the special
rights the French have unlawfully acquired in our Fatherland.

"The whole Vietnamese people, animated by a common purpose,
are determined to fight to the bitter end against any attempt
by the French colonialists to reconquer their country.

"We are convinced that the Allied nations, which at Teheran
and San Francisco have acknowledged the principles of self-
determination and equality of nations, will not refuse to ac-
knowledge the independence of Viet-Nam.

"A people who have courageously opposed French domination
for more than eighty years, a people who have fought side by
side with the Allies against the fascists during these last
years, such a people must be free and independent.

“For these reasons, we, members of the Provisional Govern-
ment of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam, solemnly declare
to the world thatViet-Nam has the right to be a free and indepen-
dent country -- and in fact it is so already. The entire Viet-
namese people are determined to mobilize all their physical and
mental strength, to sacrifice their lives and property in order
to safeguard their independence and liberty." 34/

b. Short-lived Independence in Cochinchina

September 2, 1945, found South Vietnam in profound political
disorder. The successive collapse of French, then Japanese power, followed
by the dissension among the political factions in Saigon had been accom-
panied by widespread violence in the countryside. The Cao Dai set up 4
state at Tay Ninh; the Hoa Hao established a capital in Can Tho; jacquerie
flared, and a number of rural officials and landlords were murdered. On
September 2, violence in Saigon took the lives of a French priest on the
threshold of the Cathedral, several other French, and a number of Vietnamese;
French homes were sacked, and an atmosphere of fear-ridden tension descended
upon the city.

On 12|Septentber 1945, the first British troops arrived in Saigon --
a Gurkha battalion; they were accompanied by a company of Free French soldiers.
General Douglas D. Gracey, commanding, arrived on 13 September. Prior to
his departure from India, Gracey had announced that:

"The question of the government of Indochina is exclusively
French. Civil and military control by the French is only a matter
of weeks." 35/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-36
