Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in supplying the Nva/ve forces. It will not destroy their.
capability to support their present level of military
activity. Greater concentration on the infiltration routes
in Laos and in the area immediately North of the DMZ might
prove effective from the standpoint of interdiction.

Strikes within 10 miles of the center of Hanoi and
within four miles of the center of Haiphong have required
initial approval from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secre-
taries of State and Defense, and, finally, the President.
This requirement has enabled the highest level of govern-
ment to maintain some control over the attacks against
targets located in the populous and most politically
sensitive areas of North Vietnam. Other than the Haiphong
Port, no single target within these areas has any appreci-
able significance for North Vietnam's ability to supply
men and material to the South. If these areas of control
were reduced to circles having a radii of 3 miles from the
center of Hanoi and 1-1/2 miles of the center of Haiphong,
some minor fixed targets not previously authorized would be
released for strike. More significant is the fact that the
lines of communication lying within the area previously
requiring Washington approval would be open for attack by
shrinking the control areas around Hanoi and Haiphong. The
question would simply be whether it is worth the increase in
airplane and pilot losses to attack these lines of communica-
tion in the most heavily defended part of North Vietnam
where our airplane loss ratio is highest. ;

The remaining issue on interdiction of supplies has to
do with the closing of the Port of Haiphong. Although this
is the route by which some 80%'of North Vietnamese imports
come into the country, it is not the point of entry for most
of the military supplies and ammunition. These materials
predominantly enter via the rail routes from China.

Moreover, if the Port of Haiphong were to be closed
effectively, the supplies that now enter Haiphong could,
albeit with considerable difficulty, arrive either over
the land routes or by lighterage, which has been so suc-
cessful in the continued POL supply. Under these circum-
stances, the closing of Haiphong Fort weuld not prevent
the continued supply of sufficient materials to maintain
North Vietnamese military operations in the South.

7

169 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
