Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

parges, and 354 other water craft. No evidence of seri-
our problems due to shortages of equipment. 65/

What did all of this amount to? The direct losses, in the language
of one of the monthly appraisals,

.»-Still remain small compared to total economic
activity, because the country is predominantly agricul-
tural and the major industrial facilities have not been
attacked. 66/

The "cumulative strains" resulting from the bombing had "reduced indus-
trial performance," but "the primarily rural nature of the area permits
continued functioning of the subsistence economy." The “economic deter-
joration so far has not affected the capabilities of North Vietnam's
armed forces, which place little direct reliance on the domestic economy
for material." The bombing had "still" not reduced NVN capabilities

to defend itself from attack and to support existing NVA/VC forces in
Laos and SVN, but it had "limited" "freedom of movement" in the southern
provinces, and it had "substantially curtailed" NVA capabilities to
mount "a major offensive action" in Southeast Asia. Altogether, how-
ever, "the air strikes do not appear to have altered Hanoi's deter-
mination to continue supporting the war in South Vietnam." 67/

An evaluation which had to be couched in such inexact and impres-
sionistic language was of little help in coming to grips with the most
important questions about the bombing: (1) How much "pressure" was
being applied to NVN to scale down or give up the insurgency, and how
well was it working? (2) In what ways and to what degree was the bombing
affecting NVN's capacity to wage war in the South? Whether the bombing
program was viewed primarily as a strategic-punitive campaign against
Hanoi's will or a tactical-interdiction campaign against NVN's military
capabilities in the South -- or, as some would have it, both -- these
were the questions to address, not the quantity of the damage and the
quality of the dislocations.

In dealing with the above questions, it had to be recognized that
NVN was an extremely poor target for air attack. The theory of either
strategic or interdiction bombing assumed highly developed industrial
nations producing large quantities of military goods to sustain MASS
armies engaged in intensive warfare. NVN, as U.S. intelligence agencies
knew, was an agricultural country with a rudimentary transportation
system and little industry of any kind. Nearly all of the people were
rice farmers who worked the land with water buffaloes and hand tools,
and whose well-being at a subsistence level was almost entirely dependent
on what they grew or made themselves. What intelligence agencies liked
to call the “modern industrial sector" of the economy was tiny even by
Asien standards, producing only about 12 percent of a GNP of $1.6 billion

54 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
