Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

COPY

6. On Friday, 4 September, at the joint State - JCS meeting, the
JCS further stated they believed the necessary financial support
should be granted, conditinned upon the French assurance of expanded
effort. They felt this financial support should not be doled out in a
bargaining fashion but should be made available, with such savings as
possible, for the stated purposes. We should leave the French no loop-
hole in this regard to consider that we were showing lack of intent
to support the Indochina operation and hence give them an excuse for
insufficient action.

Ls On 1 September, the French presented to the United States
& memorandum, in answer to the U.S. questionnaires, which gave fairly
detailed information on their programs. This memorandum states that
even if France's financial situation requires a reduction of her
military budget, the French government nevertheless intends to carry
out General Navarre's recommendations, and implementation has already
began. Complete execution remains subject, however, to U.S. aid
amounting to $385 million up to the end of 1954. It goes on to say:
" In the event this aid could not be granted, a complete reconsideration
of the plan of operations in I dochina would be unavoidable." The memo
then gives further information”on plans and requirements. The French
have indicated 9 additional infantry baitalions of French Union forces
ena be in Indochina by 1 November, that they are increasing the build-up
of the native forces, that they are offering independence to the
Associated States and that they will remove "colonial-mindea" French
officials. —

8. The FOA has considered the legality of providing the funds
required to meet the French program. They state that by use of the
President's powers to transfer funds within "Titles" of the MSP Act,
plus miney already appropriated for additional support for Indochina,
the requirements can be met. However, this may require a transfer of
up to $285 million from "Itle I", the NATO area, and we have not yet
fully worked out what the impact of this transfer would be on NATO
programs and on "offshore procurement" in the NATO area.

9. Mr. Dulles, at the NATO Council meeting in April of this
year told the NATO countries he expectsd offshore procurement contracts
in Europe during our fiscal year 1954 to emount to $1.5 billion, subject
to appropriations by Contrees. This was important for helping meet the
European balance of payments. Congress seriously cut appropriations,
and the transfer to Indochina of an additional $285 million from aveil-
able funds will further reduce opportunities for offshwre procurement in
Europe (although some of the Indochina funds may be expended in France
for OSP). However, the military services have been reviewing world-wide
overall MDAP end-item programs during the past month against the foreign
military units, in being or clearly to be created, which yould recieve
the end-items. This review is scheduled to be complete in about a week,
put very rough preliminary indications seem to show up lessened require-=
ments to meet priority programs due to slowness in the creation of

sHEte ° Coe

AOE Wi.

