Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

[86 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. The indirect effects of the bombing on the will of
the North Vietnamese to continue fighting and on their leaders'
appraisal of the prospective gains and costs of maintaining the
present policy have not shown themselves in any tangible way.
Furthermore, we have not discovered any basis for concluding
that the indirect punitive effects of bombing will prove
decisive in these respects.

It may be argued on a speculative basis that continued or
inereased bombing must eventually effect Hanoi's will to con-
tinue, particularly as a component of the total U.S. military
pressures being exerted throughout Southeast Asia. However,
it is not a conclusion that necessarily follows from the avail-
able evidence; given the character of North Vietnam's economy
and society, the present and prospective low levels of casualties
and the amount of aid available to Hanoi. It would appear to
be equally logical to assume that the major influences on
Hanoi's will to continue are most likely to be the course of the
war in the South and the degree to which the USSR and China sup-
port the policy of continuing the war and that the punitive
impact of U.S, bombing may have but a marginal effect in this
broader context. 39/

In the body of the report these summary formulations were
elaborated in more detail. For instance, in assessing the military and
economic effect of the bombing on North Vietnam's capacity to sustain
the war, the report stated:

The economic and military damage sustained by Hanoi in
the first year of the bombing was moderate and the cost could
be (and was) passed along to Moscow and Peiping.

The major effect of the attack on North Vietnam was to
force Hanoi to cope with disruption to normal activity,
particularly in transportation and distribution. The bombing
hurt most in its disruption of the roads and rail nets and
in the very considerable repair effort which became necessary.
The regime, however, was singularly successful in overcoming
the effects of the U.S. interdiction effort.

Mach of the damage was to installations that the North
Vietnamese did not need to sustain the military effort.
The regime made no attempt to restore storage facilities
and little to repair damage to power stations, evidently
because of the existence of adequate excess capacity and

152 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
