Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET =- Sensitive

and the in-depth assessment of the new regime and its prospects by the
country team. he] Lodge replied even before arriving at the conference
that the proposed discussions would require detailed information about

the functioning of the new rulers which it was far too early to obtain. 48 /

In a broad overview of the new political situation in Vietnam at
the plenary session in Honolulu, Lodge voiced his optimism about the
actions taken thus far by the new government to consolidate its popular
support. h9O/ In particular, he noted the efforts to eliminate forced
labor in the strategic hamlets, to curtail arbitrary arrests, to deal
with extortion and corruption, to enlist the support of the Hoa Hao and
Cao Dai sects, and to consolidate and strengthen the strategic hamlet
program. But, he left no doubt that the new leadership was inexperienced
and fragile. For this reason, he urged the conferees not to press too
much on the government too soon, either in the way of military and eco-
sii eathe pbrogrems, or steps to democratize and constitutionalize the country.
His second major point was the psychological and political, as well as
economic, need for U.S. aid to the new government in at least the amount
of our aid to Diem, and preferably more. He recognized the domestic
political problems in the U.S. with Congress, but he argued that anything
less would be a severe blow to the new rulers who were still getting their
bearings. USOM Director Brent supported these latter views, but registered
his concern about the naiveté of the new leaders in the face of an ex-
tremely grave economic situation. 50/ In response to a direct question
from Rusk as to whether en increase in dollars would shorten the War,
Lodge demurred somewhat and replied that what was required was greater
motivation. 51/ McNamara immediately disagreed, saying that his under-
standing of the pilaster deficit problem was that it was endangering all
the programs, and that both AID and MAP were in need of increased funding.
Concurring in this view, AID Administrator Bell agreed to review the
entire AID program.

General Harkins' assessment of the military situation took note of
the upsurge of Viet Cong activity in the week following the coup, but
in general remained optimistic, although more guardedly than in the past. 52/
The sharp inerease in VC attacks after the coup seemed to have been a
haphazard, and not part of a well coordinated country-wide response to
the uncertain political situation. And in the week just ended, activity
had returned to more normal levels. Moreover, he did not show concern
about the seeming long term deterioration in the statistical indicators.
While he was favorably impressed with the determination of the new leaders
to prosecute the war and make needed changes, he was worried about the
sweeping replacement of division and corps commenders and province chiefs.
The discontinuities and disruptions created by wholesale replacement of
province chiefs could have a serious negative effect on the whole counter-
insurgency program. On the positive side, he noted the strengthened
chain of command under General Don as both Defense Minister and Chief of
Staff. McNamara pointedly questioned both Harkins end the other military

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
