Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. Threads that Met at Honolulu

A. Hop Tac

While pacification received a low emphasis during troubled 1964-1965,
there was one important exception: the Hop Tac program, designed to put
"whatever resources are required" into the area surrounding Saigon to
pacify it. The area was chosen by Ambassador Lodge in his last weeks as
Ambassador in June, 1964, and Hop Tac deserves study because both its
failures and limited achievements had many of the characteristics of our
later pacification efforts -- and because, like all pacification efforts,
there was constant disagreement within the Mission, the press, and the
Vietnamese as to how well the program was doing.

Hop Tac -- an intensive pacification effort in the provinces ringing
Saigon -- was formally proposed at a high level strategy session in
Honolulu in July of 1964 by Lodge, then on his way home from his first
assignment as Ambassador. In a paper presented to Secretaries Rusk and
McNamara and incoming Ambassador Taylor at Honolulu (dated June 19, 1964),
Lodge wrote:

"A combined GVN-US effort to intensify pacification efforts
in critical provinces should be made...The eight critical pro-
vinces are: Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, Hau Nghia, Long An, Dinh Tuong,
Go Cong, Vinh Long, and Quang Ngai. Top priority and maximum
effort should be concentrated initially in the strategically
important provinces nearest to Saigon, i.e., Long an, Hau Nghia,
and Binh Duong. Once real progress has been made in these p O-
vinces, the same effort should be made in the five others."

General Taylor and General Westmoreland began Hop Tac, setting up
a new and additional headquarters in Saigon which was supposed to tie
together the overlapping and quarrelsome commands in the Saigon area.
The Vietnamese set up a parallel, "counterpart" organization, although
critics of Hop Tac were to point out that the Vietnamese Hop Tac head-
querters had virtually no authority or influence, and seemed primarily
designed to satisfy the Americans. (Ironically, Hop Tac is the Viet-
namese word for "cooperation," which turned out to be just what Hop Tac
lacked.)

Hop Tac had a feature previously missing from pacification plans:
it sought to tie together the pacification plans of a seven-province
area (expended from Lodge's three provinces to include the adjacent pro-
yinees of Phuoc Tuy, Bien Hoa, Phuoc Thanh, and Gia Dinh, which surround
Saigon like a doughnut), into a plen in which each province subordinated
its own priorities to the concept of building a "giant oil spot" around
Saigon. In a phrase which eventually became a joke in the Mission, the
American heading the Hop Tac Secretariat at its inception, Colonel

1 ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
