Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Second, the proposed priority in the Delta clashed with McGarr's
priorities which placed War Zone D first, the area around Saigon second,
and the Delta third. There was a lack of unanimity among the U.S. advisors
about the relative importance of the War Zone D operation but the military,
in particular, were looking for an important operation to help the (hope-
fully) revitalized ARVN demonstrate its offensive spirit and mobile capabili-
ties. This desire gave rise to the third and fourth objections -- or fears.

The "static security framework" in the villages to which Thompson
referred struck General McGarr as an unwarranted downgrading of the need
for a sizeable conventional military force to play an important role in
pacification. Thompson's stated desire to emphasize police forces in lieu
of regular military forces was regarded by the U.S. military advisory chief
as unrealistic -- a transferral of Malayan experience to a locale in which
the existing tools of policy were very different.

Related to this objection was a final set of disagreements.
Thompson had wanted to go slowly and to let a new GVN organization grow
from the effort. The U.S. military advisory chief also wanted to go slowly --
put not that slowly. Not only would the Viet Cong not wait, it was simply
unsound policy not to use the tools at hand. It would not do to reduce the
ARVN and increase police forces while the VC continued thier successes.
It was necessary, in sum, to act in a limited area but to act quickly.
Thompson's recommendations did not look to quick action, emphasized the wrong
area, were designed to emphasize the wrong operational agency, and proposed
unacceptable command lines. )2/

It is important to note that in spite of these explicit disagree-
ments there were broad areas of apparent agreement between Thompson and ,
his U.S. counterparts. (Apparent, because the "areas of agreement" concealed
differences, too.) The U.S. MAAG was amenable to the development of strate-
gic hamlets, General McGarr claimed. 43/ Indeed, MAAG's long, diffuse doc-
trinal "handbook" for advisors in the field did devote three pages -- without
any particular emphasis -- to the "secure village concept." 4h/ MAAG did
not stress the centrality of strategic hamlets per se, but neither did
Thompson. Strategic hamlets were to Thompson a way station enroute to
his real objective -- winning the loyalty of the rural peasants, This
was apparently compatible with the sequential steps to pacitication out-
lined in MAAG's own Geographically Phased Counterinsurgency Plan. If the
competing approaches of the U.S. and British advisors had not been made
compatible, there was, at least, some agreed ground from which to launch
the effort to make them compatible.

B. Reactions in Washington

That such ground existed was fortunate, for Thompson's evolutionary
plan was not only finding a warm reception at the Presidential Palace,
it was also winning an attentive ear in Washington. As already mentioned,
Thompson talked with General Taylor during the latter's October 1961 mission
to Saigon and provided Taylor a copy of the initial British "appreciation."

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
