Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In March, MACV J-1 had completed a comprehensive review of ARVN
personnel policies, the Murdsy Report, and forwarded it to JGS for action.
A tally at the end of the year indicated progress on only 16 of 28 specific
recommendations. One that received no response was the suggestion that the
officer appointment base be expanded. 67/ In May, the Secretary of Defense
had ordered COMUSMACV to develop, jointly with GVN, procedures for program-
ming pacification operations with time-phased requirements for manpower and
money. A joint, combined (MACV-USOM-GVN) committee was established. It
had completed a programming document in June. After approval by RVNAT
and.MACV, joint US-GVN teams visited each Corps to acquaint selected per-
sonnel with the documents. As of August 31, fewer than half the provinces
had submitted pacification plans; so the teams again visited each province
to reinstruct province chiefs and sector advisors. All province reports
were finally received by October. 68/ In July, the first Senior Advisors
Monthly Report (SAME) was submitted. These put MACV in a better position
to advise, and in October it sent a detailed letter of deficiencies to
CINCRVMNAF.

A joint combat effectiveness inspection team started its work,
and at year's end the ARVN IG faced the question whether the refresher
course at the National Training Center was needed for two battalions de-
clared ineffective by COMUSMACV. In October, U.S. advisors to RVNAF units
submitted the first semi-annual report of their personal observations of
the treatment and use of MAP equipment. Deficiencies were noted in a letter
to JGS. In one instance it was found that ordnance vans were being converted
into rolling quarters for generals. After a threat to withdraw the vans,
the fault was corrected and the vans were returned to their authorized
use.

On October 5, COMUSMACV forwarded to the Embassy the report of
a month-long study instigated by the Ambassador on how to revitalize the
entire civic action program. It recommended that a USOM-USIS-MACV study
group develop a joint, integrated mechanism to guide and coordinate civic
action. The groups' recommendations were to provide a basis for discussions
with the Vietnamese on how best to channel. and revitalize the combined
eivic action effort.

On the subject of command relationships, JCS looked ahead to
the possible deployment of U.S. ground forces and anticipated operational
control of RVN forces in combined operations. However, that idea would
be dropped later. 69/

Following a Taylor-Khanh agreement to launch "Hop Tac" on Octo-
ber 1, USOM and the Vietnamese NSC met on September 25 to discuss pacifica-
tion, after which Taylor commented:

"Tn general, I consider the meeting was satisfactory
continuation of our bilateral effort and that top priority
is at last being given to Hop Tac operation. Also that
general result of meeting focused attention on priority
problems. The pay-off will be quality of follow-up." 70/

61: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
