Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. Division of Far Eastern Affairs (FE) forwards

comments and suggested changes to EUR version of the

Memorandum on Indochina policy. FE recommends additions

to the EUR proposals as well as not opposing restoration

of Indochina to France, provided France gave adequate

assurances on five major points chiefly concerning Indo-

chinese independence. Memorandum by Mr. Stanton, FE,

COENE DAMS oe Meth LOYD. nes asin tnd RAS OTS et RG Melee emer casicel a. OF

c. Mr. Dunn feels that it is better to let the Indo-
china policy matter drift rather than base it on the FE
version of the Memorandum. Dunn message to Mr. Grew,
Under Secretary of State, 23 April 1945......ccccccccsccccccee 18

d. The final compromise Memorandum to the President

‘includes extracts from both the FE and EUR versions,

but does include mention that the U.S, would seek the

French views on the five points raised by FE. Memoran-

dum to the President, subject: American Policy with

Respect to Indochina, undated, not SeNtrecsscceveccceveserseee 19

e. The draft cable, which was approved by all
Divisions concerned,requests French indication of in-
HENGIONS Gn TIVE? POLHES* 5.5y\ caw piiclecisind sence wae eeeaewessieeel OF

1) Indochinese self-government within a French
&
Union.

(2) Economic and commercial non-discrimination.
(3) Haiphong as a free port.
(4) Recognition of an Indochina-Thai border.

(5) International security arrangements for South-

‘east Asia. Unnumbered cable, 9 May 1945.

Assistant Secretary of War proposes "so far as practic-

able" the U.S. should avoid "unnecessary or long term"

commitments of assistance to French resistance forces

in Indochina. Memorandum, R.E. Cox, SWIICC, to Mr. Bon-

DEEHES WE: 2 Moy TONS pre scap read veeubislsunerdeaRieerncdeeceenat 226

French Foreign Minister is informed by Stettinius at
San Francisco that "the record is entirely innocent...

of this government questioning...French sovereignty over
Indochina." Grew 1949 to.Caffery, 9 May 1945......-eeeeeecess ~27

ii : TOP SECRET - Sensitive

