Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and officials is now more feasible in the light of per=
formance during the Tet offensive. We should not hesitate
to make our desires known and back them up by refusing to
provide support for the incompetent. For key commanders,
we should require the right of prior approval on a secret
and discreet basis. The precise tools of leverage to be
applied in this regard should be left to the US Mission,
but could include withholding advice and assistance at
jJocal levels in extreme cases.

7. The Prime Minister - We should solicit Ambassador
Bunker's views on the desirability of replacing the Prime
Minister. If he is to be replaced we should agree on his
successor beforehand, in consultation with Thieu and Ky.

8. The United Front - A nationalist spirit of coopera-
tion and unity came to the fore in the immediate wake of
the Tet offensive. It is being manifested incompletely in
attempts to organize groups in support of the national task.
Despite the personal misgivings of old antagonists there has
been some success. This is now threatened by personal rival-
ries, and most significantly by differences between Thieu and
Ky. We need to find a formula for joint efforts. Ambassador
Bunker suggests that the optimum result would be a "super front"
of the anti-communist groups. Although not directly tied to
the government, such a front could serve to rally the people
proadly and emotionally against the Viet Cong. To succeed it
must. be backed by the leadership of the government - both
Thieu and Ky - but not appear to compete with the National
Assembly. It should encompass all elements in the society,
but not be the vehicle for any one power group.

9. Economic Measures - There will be increased inflation
in Vietnam this year, and additional US troops will make it
more severe. Steps need to be taken now to counter the
threat of inflation, if we are not to be faced with a severe
erisis next fall and winter. The GVN needs to move on tax
increases, and U.S, and GVN expenditures for non-essential
programs in Vietnam should be restrained. On the other hand,
wage increases for civil and military personnel in the GVN
are needed if inflation is not to weaken their will and support.

Additionally, we must demand of the GVN some measure of
action on their part to compensate for the effect of addi-
tional US troops on the US balance of payments. This can
be done by having the GVN provide to the US at no cost the
additional piaster costs incurred by our troop increase. We
should also insist that GVN reserves be reduced to $250 mil-
lion from the present maximum reserve level of $300 million
and that a significant portion of the reserve be invested in
medium and long term US securities. The details of these

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
