Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Nhi Long has been severely threatened in August,
the route to Vinh Long is again insecure...else-
where the hamlet program appears to be over-
extended and with insufficient troop support is
under serious threat in former VC strongholds.
Security in southernmost Long Toan District, the
province VC haven, continues to be very poor...
Major Thao, an extremely competent leader, ...Was
replaced in late July...

Vinh Long: Although most signs indicate progress...
evaluation of Vinh Long remains largely an evalua-
tion of It. Col. Phuoc, Chief of Province...whose
idea had previously led him to construct through
corvee labor kilometer after kilometer of useless
walls, and whose insensitivity to the population
had led to considerable popular antipathy. An
apparent change of attitude has taken place... and
Phuoc now says that the strategic hamlet is a state
of mind rather than a fortification. Phuoc's sin-
cerity and commitment to the program are still prob-
lematical, however, as is public acceptance of him
and of the program...some pessimists feel that this
may well prove...the most difficult province in the
Delta to pacify.

Chuong Thien: The Communists still control most of

the people and land in Chuong Thien../the/ new ‘
province chief...has been evasive and has shown no

desire really to cooperate...the large relocation
effort...risks loss of the province to the VC

because the people involved have been alienated,

Ba Xuyen: Shortcoming in the implementation of

the hamlet program, as well as a lack of confi-

dence in the province chief...led to the recall in
late August of the USOM provincial representative

end possible unofficial suspension of, USOM...in an
effort to build Statistics, the province had con-
structed a number of vulnerable and non~viable
hamlets. There has been a forced wholesale reloca-
tion, insufficiently justified, poorly financed...
numerous occurrences have convinced us that there

is venality...and lack of good faith. A new province
chief (not presently in prospect) might permit prog~
ress in this rich and important area...a major effort
to. gain popular support for government is needed in
this as in many other Delta provinces,

An Xuyen: The province remains under VC control with
the exception of a handful of widely separated govern-
ment strong points... An Xuyen,-comprising much of

the enemy's main Delta power center, is a primary
source of men, money and supplies for the Communists,

13 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
