Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The barrier would have two somewhat different parts,
one designed against foot traffic and one against vehicles.
The preferred location for the anti-foot-traffic barrier is
in the region along the southern edge of the DMZ to the
Iaotian border and then north of Tchepone to the vicinity
of Muong Sen, extending about 100 by 20 kilometers. This
area is virtually unpopulated, and the terrain is quite
rugged, containing mostly V-shaped valleys in which the
opportunity for alternate trails appears lower than it is
elsewhere in the system. The location of choice for the
anti-vehicle part of the system is the area, about 100 by 40
kilometers, now covered by Operation Cricket. In this area
the road network tends to be more constricted than else-
where, and there appears to be a smaller area available for
new roads. An alternative location for the anti-personnel
system is north of the DMZ to the Laotian border and then
north along the crest of the mountains dividing Laos from
North Vietnam. It is less desirable economically and mili-
tarily because of its greater length, greater distance
from U.S. bases, and greater proximity to potential North
Vietnamese counter-efforts.

The air-supported barrier would, if necessary, be
supplemented by a manned "fence" connecting the eastern
end of the barrier to the sea.

The construction of the air-supported barrier could be
initiated using currently available or nearly available
components, with some necessary modifications, and could
perhaps be installed by a year or so from go-ahead. How-
ever, we anticipate that the North Vietnamese would learn
to cope with a barrier built this way after some period of
. time which we cannot estimate, but which we fear may be
short. Weapons and sensors which can make a much more
effective barrier, only some of which are now under develop-
ment, are not likely to be available in less than 18 months
to 2 years. Even these, it must be expected, will eventu-
ally be overcome by the North Vietnamese, so that further
improvements in weaponry will be necessary. Thus we
envisage a dynamic "battle of the barrier," in which the
barrier is repeatedly improved and strengthened by the
introduction of new components, and which will hopefully
permit us to keep the North Vietnamese off balance by
continually posing new problems for them.

This barrier is in concept not very different from
what has’ already been suggested elsewhere; the new aspects

are: the very large scale of area denial, especially mine

. 156 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
