Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

taken some steps to meet the internal security problem, he tends
to view it almost entirely in military terms. He believes that
increased military activity against the Viet Cong, along with an
expansion of the agroville program, will greatly improve internal
security. He has been openly contemptuous of the views of
oppositionists in Saigon and regards them as uninformed and dupes
of the Communists. Diem also has failed to take any major steps
against corruption and arbitrary conduct on the part of the Can
Iao organization."

After this discussion of the political situation, the
estimate discussed the Viet Cong pressures as: "aggravating many of the
government's problems." (Ibid., p. 2) (Underlining added) The earlier
report on internal security had commented, "It is not completely clear
why the DRV has chosen this particular time to mount an intensified
guerrilla campaign in South Vietnam," (Saigon 278, p- 2) and had
advanced several hypotheses including Diem's view that it represented
"a somewhat desperate attempt to disrupt the progress of South Vietnam,"
in the face of steady GVN progress and DRV failure to interfere suc-
cessfully with the National Assembly elections in August. The list of
hypotheses in March did not include the possibility that the communists
might have judged that the political situation within SVN had significantly
deteriorated (earlier foreseen as the likely occasion for an increase
in overt communist activities), but the August estimate emphasized this
possibility.

a - The indications of increasing dissatisfaction with

the Diem government have probably encouraged the Hanoi regime,
supported and guided by the Chinese Communists, to take stronger
action at this time... given ' .. .a sizable and effective
indigenous guerrilla apparatus responsive to Communist control';
and 'a government lacking in positive support from its people’;
2 « « ™ (SNIP 63-160; p. 3)

The estimate concluded with the pregnant comment that:

"In countering the Viet Cong challenge, Diem faces many of
the same problems which confronted the French during the Indo-
Chins War"... "

Some relevant portions of much earlier U.S. intelligence
estimates might be recorded here:

"Despite these advances /which included ‘the relocation of
scattered villages in the Delta into centralized and defensible
sites' as ‘an important step toward the eventual "pacification"
of heavily infiltrated areas’ and increases in the size of the
Vietnamese National Army/ Vietnam still lacks the degree of

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
