Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-~ release Vietnamese forces from advanced and static
defense positions to permit their fuller commitment
to counterinsurgency actions;

-- provide maximum training to approved Vietnamese
forces; and

-- provide significant military resistance to poten-
tial North Vietnam Communist and/or Chinese Com-
munist action. 26/

The JCS reply, dated May 10, deferred details on the composition of
U.S. forces, but quite emphatically recommended that we do send them,
"assuming the political decision is to hold Southeast Asia outside the
communist sphere." Here is the JCS memo:

In considering the possible commitment of U.S.
forces to South Vietnam, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
have reviewed the overall critical situation in
Southeast Asia with particular emphasis upon the
present highly flammable situation in South Vietnam.
In this connection the question, however, of South
Vietnam should not be considered in isolation but
rather in conjunction with Thailand and their over-
all. relationship to the security of Southeast Asia.
The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the ques-
tion regarding the deployment of U.S. forces into
Thailand were provided to you by JCSM-311-61, dated
9 May 1961. . The current potentially dangerous mili-
tary and political situation in Laos, of course, is
the focal point in this area. Assuming that the
political decision is to hold Southeast Asia outside
the Communist sphere, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are
of the opinion that U.S. forces should be deployed
immediately to South Vietnam; such action should be
taken primarily to prevent the Vietnamese from being
subjected to the same situation as presently exists in
Laos, which would then require deployment of U.S.
forces into an already existing combat situation.

In view of the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
recommend that the decision be made to deploy suitable
U.S. forees to South Vietnam. Sufficient forces should
be deployed to accomplish the following purposes:

Provide a visible deterrent to potential North
Vietnam and/or Chinese Communist action;

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
