Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I am designating one of our most distinguished Ameri-
cans, Ambassador Averell Harriman, as my personal repre-
sentative for such talks. In addition, I have asked
Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, who returned from Moscow
for consultation, to be available to join Ambassador
Harriman at Geneva or any other suitable place -- just
as soon as Hanoi agrees to a conference.

I call upon President Ho Chi Minh to respond posi-
tively, and favorably, to this new step toward peace.

If peace did not come through negotiations, however, the President
indicated that our common resolve was unshakable and our common strength
invineible. As evidence of this, he listed the achievements of the South
Vietnamese nation.

Tonight, we and the other allied nations are con-
tributing 600,000 fighting men to assist 700,000 South
Vietnamese troops in defending their little country.

Our presence there has always rested on this basic
belief: the main burden of preserving their freedom
must be carried out by them -- by the South Vietnamese
themselves.

We and our allies can only help to provide a shield --
behind which the people of South Vietnam can survive and
can grow and develop. On their efforts -~ on their
determinations and resourcefulness -- the outcome will
ultimately depend.

That small, beleaguered nation has suffered terrible
punishment for more than twenty years.

I pay tribute once again tonight to the great courage
and endurance of its people. Sonth Vietnam supports armed
forces tonight of almost 700,000 men -- and I call your
attention to the fact that that is the equivalent of more
than 10 million in our own population. Its people maintain
their firm determination to be free of domination by the

North.

There has been substantial progress, I think, in
puilding a durable government during these.last three
years. The South Vietnam of 1965 could not have survived
the enemy's Tet offensive of 1968. The elected govern-
ment of South Vietnam survived that attack ~- and is
rapidly repairing the devastation that it wrought.

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
