Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to how best to use those opportunities. We believe the
political value of the attacks should be optimized. We
believe the political value of the attacks should be
optimized. The effective destruction of clearly important
military and economic targets without excessive popu-
lation damage would seem indicated. Excessive losses in
relation to results would have an adverse political effect.
The air fields (perhaps including Gia Lam) would meet

the criteria. The Hanoi power plant would probably meet
the criteria. There are few other targets of sufficient
importance, not already authorized, to do so.

In particular, this view opposes the proposal to
define only 3-mile and 1-1/2-mile "closed areas" around
Hanoi and Haiphong respectively. Individual targets
within Hanoi and Haiphong and between the 10- and 3-mile
circles for Hanoi and the 4 and 1-1/2 mile-circles for
Haiphong, should be considered on a case-by-case basis
in accordance with the above criteria. However, blanket
authority for operations up to the 3-mile and 1-1/2-mile
eircles, respectively, appears to take in only small
targets hving no appreciable military significance; on
the other hand, experience has indicated that systematic
operations particularly against road and rail routes
simply and slightly to the repair burdens, while at the
same time involving substantial civilian casualties in
the many suburban civilian areas located along these routes.

In addition, a picture of systematic and daily bombing
this close to Hanoi and Haiphong seems to us to run sig-
nificant risks of major adverse reactions in key third
nations. There is certainly some kind of "flash point"
in the ability of the British Government to maintain its
support for our position, and we believe this "flash
point" might well be crossed by the proposed operations,
in contrast to operations against specified targets of
the type that have been carried out in the Hanoi and
Haiphong areas in the past.

Mining of Haiphong

We believe it to be agreed that substantial amounts
of military-related supplies move through the Port of
Haiphong at present. Nevertheless, it is also agreed
that this flow of supplies could be made up through far
greater use of the road and rail lines runsing through
China, and through lightering and other emergency techniques

AGB TOP SECRET - Sensitive
