Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Union established, and a permanent government chosen,

4% was difficult for French officials to sign any pores
manent treaty or agreement with the Viet-Nan. For that
reason he was quite Willing to adjourn the Fontainebleau
Conference until January or thereabouts.

With regard to the modus vivendi which should have
been signed September 10, 1946, Ho Chi-minh said that
agrecnents had beon reached regarding French economic
and cultural rignuts in the Vict-Nam, a eustoms union
for Indochina, and a common currency, although there
had been some difficulty over the drafting since he
refused to ailow the phrase "Indochinese Federation",
since it does not yet existe The French, however, have
not accepted the Viet-Nam demand that "democratic
Liberties" be restored in Cochinchina. Ho Chi-minh
explained that by this he meant freedom of the press,
freedom of assembly, and the release of political
prisoners. The Viev~Nam also insists that they be ver-
mitted to send a delegation to Cochinchina to make sure
that the French live up to these provisions and to co~
operate with the French in bringing about the ond of
guerrilla warfare. Hse admitted that there are many
unsavory elements within the resistance movement in
Cochinchina, but argued that if his representatives
could go through the country and talk to local leaders

4% would be possible to distinguish between bandits

and pstriots, and the former could then be liquidated
by either his or the French forces,

Ho Chi-minh stated that he still hoped to reach
an agreement with the French before his departure on
September 14, but that in any case he must return on
that date since he had already been too long away from

his country. :

Ho Chi-minh spoke at various times of the aid
which he hoped to get from the United States, but was
vague except as regards economic aid, With regard to
the latter,he explained that the riches of his country
were largoly undeveloped, that he felt that Indochina
offered a fertile field for American capital and enter-
prise. He had resisted and would continus to resist

the French desire for a continuation of their former

policy of economic monopoly. He was willing to give
the French priority in such matters as advisers, con~
cessions, and purchases of machinery and equipment,
put if the French were not in a position to mest his
country's needs he would insist on the right to ap-
proach other friendly countries. He hinted that the
policy might apply to military and naval matters as
well and mentioned the naval base at Cam Ranh bay.

oP i:
' As I left, Ho Chi-minh stated that he hoped that
through his contacts with the Eubassy the Ans Tican
public would be informed of the true situation in

Indochina.

C-10! George M. Abbott —
