Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TII. A. 3. THE U.S. NEGOTIATING POSITION DURING THE CONFERENCE

1. Threat of United Action Influences Negotiations

a. United Action is Allowed to Remain a Public Option

Between mid-June and the end of the Conference on 21 July,
U.S. diplomacy worked at unifying the Western alliance behind a Southeast
Asia defense pact and at coalescing a united Western diplomatic front at
Geneva so as to obtain the best possible settlement. In this process,
the Western alliance gradually cohered. The result was that Anglo-French
cooperation was gained not only for the concept of a regional security
pact, but also for a firm negotiating position vis-a-vis the communists.
Additionally, although the U.S. private position was, by late June, to
abide by a settlement which partitioned Vietnam and provided for "the
ultimate reunification of Vietnam by peaceful means" (under the U.S.-
U.K. seven-point memorandum of 29 June, our public posture at the Conference
left unclear to the communists just what terms would in fact be acceptable
to us. For our part, united action was a dead issue by mid-June; but the
communist negotiators could not have known this. As a result, they may
well have been influenced toward a settlement by the belief that further
prolongation of talks would only reinforce Western unity, perhaps coalesce
a united response in Indochina previously unobtainable by the U.S., and
very likely bring the three Indochinese states into the proposed American
security treaty.

b. France and U.K. Exploit U.S. Threat

Both the French and the British negotiators made excellent
use of America's ambivalent status. The Chief French delegate, Jean
Chauvel, told a Russian delegate, Kuznetsov, for instance, that France's
proposed division of Vietnam at the 18th parallel would probably be more
acceptable to the other conferees than the unreasonable Viet Minh demand
for the 13th parallel. Chauvel added that a settlement along the French
line would thereby avert the risk of an internationalization of the
conflict. ay Eden also used the implied threat of U.S. involvement.
During late May, he warned Chou "again" of the dangers inherent in the
Indochina situation, which could lead to unpredictable and serious results,
When Chou said he was counting on Britain to prevent this from happening,
the Foreign Secretary replied Chou was mistaken, since Britain would
stand by the U.S. in a showdown. 2/ And Bidault and Smith, in mid-June,
agreed that in view of genuine Sino-Soviet desire to keep the Conference
going, Chinese concern over U.S. bases in Laos and Cambodia should not
be dispelled, 3/ :

e. Eden Viewed as Moderating U.S. Threat
The British seem to have played a particularly vital role

in exploiting ambiguous American intentions for diplomatic gain. At the
Conference, Eden was in close contact with Molotov and Chou, and evidently

A-34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
