ie

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Vv. B. JUSTIFICATION OF THE WAR -- PUBLIC STATEMENTS

Ts

EISENHOWER ADMINISTRATION

CONTENTS

Eisenhower cites the interrelationship of Southeast Asian
nations, their natural resources and strategic locations
as justifying U.S. concerns (4 August 1953)....ccccceveccccecsscss Beh

Joint Franco-American communique citing agreement whereby
U.S. increases its aid to France in prosecution of its efforts
against Viet Minh (30 September 1953) ...ccccecsersvecseccecesceces BHO

Eisenhower emphasizes support of French is to avoid the tragedy
of U.S. getting involved on large scale in Southeast Asia
(10 February FOS) cv vs os oreese ow o's stale ion) bialwis «eo w\e'wie'p/ainiaiewidgb/ers/scigucerals B-5

Secretary of State presents a most revealing assessment of
administration's thinking on Indochina and the threat of Red

China. He cites expansion of communist domination, the in-

creased dangers to other nearby countries, the loss of food

supply to Japan and India, the strategic location of Indochina

and the military bases as paramount concerns (29 March 195h)......  B-6

Alfred le Sesne Jenkins (Officer in Charge, Chinese Political
Affairs) discusses Chinese Communist regime and its relation-
ship to Soviet Union (2 April DOG) cp wacicin els aces Pie ape elas ecintcabee B-9

President states "falling domino” principle loses people and

strategic resources to communism and threatens Australia in

comments on importance of Indochina to free world. He responds

to Sen. John Kennedy's expressed position on a guarantee of

independence needed to justify U.S. effort (7 April 1954)......... B+10

Under Secretary Smith indicates vital basic reason for
Indochina's importance is communist expansion, and reiterates
"domino" theory and strategic resources (19 April 1954)........... B-12

Secretary of State Dulles reports on London-Paris conversations
on free world interests; advocates collective defense for
Indochina as U.S. solution to communist threat (19 April 1954).... B-13

State Department comments on a speech by Vice President Nixon

by referring to stated U.S. policy of “united action”
(17 April TOBIN. owiayee avis oa b'e)s. wp BCS9 48-65 Rae bs We Ghhee Sees Sow bed eS ES B-1)

B-1
