Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

be misunderstood as an indication of weekness, and it is there-
fore necessary for me to point out that if this pause should be -
misunderstood in this fashion, by any party, it would be neces-
sary to demonstrate more clearly than ever, after the pause
ended, that the United States is determined not to accept
aggression without reply in Vietnam. Moreover, the United
States must point out that the decision to end air attacks for
this limited trial period is one which it must be free to re-
verse if at any time in the coming days there should be actions
by the other side in Vietnam which required immediate reply.

But my Government is very hopeful that there will be no such
misunderstanding and that this first pause in the air attacks
may meet with a response which will permit further and more
extended suspension of this form of military action in the ex-
pectation of equally constructive actions by the other side in
the future. END TEXT,

2. He summoned Soviet Ambassador, Anatol Dobrynin to his office in
the State Department and made virtually the same oral statement to hin, -
confirmed by a parallel written version handed to hin. Rusk, that Sone
evening described the meeting to Foy Kohler in a second cable, 129/ sent
immediately after the message quoted above:

I explained we were not indicating any precise number of
days,.that we retained freedom of action, and that we would
convey similar message to Hanoi. I also said we would make
no announcement although we expected press pressures, and
made clear our action related only to strikes of any sort
and not to continued reconnaissance. (Paper itself mekes
a) action confined to DRV and does not include Laos 0
ov. ;

I also said we did not know what to expect but that Henoi
knows what it is doing and can find a way to make its response
clear.

Dobrynin noted we were, merely informing Soviets and was
clearly relieved we not asking them to act as intermediary.
Asked about my trip to Vienna end indicated there might be
further conversations there Saturday with Gromyko- Asked
basically whether action represented eny change in fundamental
US position.

I replied that it did not and that this should be no surprise.
I reviewed recent indications that Cambodia conference

plocked by Peiping despite favorable mention in DRV-Moscow
communique and that three-party talks on Laos likewise in

e9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
