Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

more or less as indicated in its most recent statements.
It would begin talks fairly soon, would accept a fairly
Wide ranging exploration of issues, but would not moderate
its terms for a final settlement or stop fighting in the
South."

As discussed elsewhere in this memorandum, a cessation of the
bombing by us in North Vietnam is the required first step if 4
political solution to the conflict is to be found. We may want
to seek some assurance from Hanoi that it would not attack from
across the DMZ if we halt the bombing. Alternatively, we could
stop all bombing except that directly related to ground opera-
tions and indicate that our attacks are in the nature of
returning fire and will be halted when the enemy halts its
attacks in the area. 62/

These views of Clifford's staff never went to the White House, but
are indicative of the direction and tone of the debates in the policy
meetings within the Administration. Another aspect of the policy environ-
ment in March 1968 was ISA's isolation in arguing that Hanoi was moving
toward acceptance of the San Antonio formula and a negotiated settlement.
As we shall see, when the decision to halt the bombing north of 20° was
finally made, it was not in the expectation that North Vietnam would
come to the negotiating table.

4. The "Senior Informal Advisory Group"

At this juncture in mid-March, with the President vacillating
as to a course of action, probably the most important influence on his
thinking and ultimate decision was exercised by a small group of prominent
men outside the Government, known in official Washington as the "Senior
Informal Advisory Group." All had at one time or another over the last
twenty years served as Presidential advisers. They gathered in Washington
at the request of the President on March 18 to be briefed on the latest
developments in the war and to offer Mr. Johnson the benefit of their

_experience in making a tough decision. Stuart Loory of the Los Angeles
Times in an article in May reported what has been generally considered
to bea reliable account of what took place during and after their visit
+o Washington and what advice they gave the President. The story as

’ Joory reported it is included here in its entirety.

Hawks' Shift Precipitated Bombing Halt

Eight prominent hawks and a dove -- all from outside the
government -- gathered in the White House for a night and day
last March to judge the progress of the Vietnam war for
President Johnson.

190 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
