Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Whether they will move to negotiate is of course a slightly
different question, but we could be visibly and strongly
on the way.

If China should go into a real convulsion, I would
raise these odds slightly, and think it clearly more likely
that Hanoi would choose a negotiating path to the conelusion. 70/

Much of Bundy's sanguine optimism was based on the convulsions going on
in China. He estimated that the odds for another significant Chinese
internal upheaval were at least 50-50, and that this would offset
Hanoi's recent promise of additional aid from the Soviets. He argued
that it should be the principle factor in the consideration of any addi-
tional step-up in the bombing, or the mining of Haiphong harbor. Specif-
ically, he gave the following objections to more bombing:

Additional Action in the North. Of the major targets
still not hit, I would agree to the Hanoi power station,
but then let it go at that, subject only to occasional
re-strikes where absolutely required. In particular, on
the airfields, I think we have gone far enough to hurt and
not far enough to drive the aircraft to Chinese fields, which
I think could be very dangerous.

I would strongly oppose the mining of Haiphong at any
time in the next nine months, unless the Soviets categori-
cally use it to send in combat weapons. (It may well be
that we should warn them quietly but firmly that we are
watching their traffic into Haiphong very closely, and
particularly from this standpoint.) Mining of Haiphong, at
any time, is bound to risk a confrontation with the Soviets
and to throw Hanoi into greater dependence on Communist
China. These in themselves would be very dangerous and
adverse to the whole notion of getting Hanoi to change its
attitude. Moreover, I think they would somehow manage to
get the stuff in through China no matter what we did to
Haiphong. a/

In addition to these considerations, however, Bundy was worried about
the international implications of more bombing:

International Factors. My negative feeling on serious
additional bombing of the North and mining of Haiphong is
based essentially on the belief that these actions will
not change Hanoi's position, or affect Hanoi's capabilities
in ways that counter-balance the risks and adverse reaction
in China and with the Soviets alone.

eh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
