Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

V. DIFFERING PERSPECTIVES AND EXPECTATIONS

Three somewhat different views may be categorized which are of interest
to the present inquiry: those of the U.S. military advisors, of the U.S.
political leadership, and of the Diem government's leaders. Such generali-
zations are admittedly risky and easily overdrawn; there were, of course,
differences between the perceptions and expectations of, say, the U.S.
military advisors. For example, those farthest from Saigon tended to be
less patient -- with Diem and in expecting results -- than were those closer
to the area of operations. Still, discernible differences of outlook and
expectations may be said to represent the prevailing views in each of these
three groups.

A. U.S. Military Advisors

The U.S. military advisors mistrusted arguments which stressed
the Vietnamese struggle as essentially political rather than military.
They were quite willing to concede that the struggle was multi-dimensional
but they feared instinctively any line of reasoning which might appear to
argue thet military considerations were relatively unimportant in Vietnam.
So, too, they were wary of schemes which might lead ARVN to perpetuate its
defensive tactical stance. Both dangers were present in the strategic
hamlet program. The same military advisors were more forceful than others
in stressing the need for the Diem regime to rationalize its command arrange-
ments and to plan comprehensively and in detail from the highest to lowest
levels. Their operational interest concentrated on making ARVN not just
more mobile but more aggressive. Their creed, developed through years of
experience and training (or vicarious experience) was to "close with and
destroy the enemy." One could expect them, then, to be more than willing
to turn over the job of static defense to the CDC and CG at the earliest
opportunity, to keep a weather eye out for opportunities to engage major
vc formations in decisive battle, and to chafe under the painfully slow
evolutionary process which was implicit even in their own 1961 geographically
phased plan.

B. U.S. Political Leadership

The U.S. political leadership, and to varying degrees the leaders
in the Saigon Embassy and in USOM, were more attuned to the political
problems -- both with respect to GVN-U.S, relations and to the problem
of winning broad support among the Vietnamese for the Diem administration.
This made members of this group inherently more sympathetic to proposals
such as the Thompson plan for the Delta than they were, for instance, to
increasing ARVN's size and capabilities. They found compelling the logic
of analyses such as Hilsman's which cut to the political root rather than
treating only the military symptoms. One suspects -- though documentation
would never be found to support it -- that they were attracted by an argu-
ment which did suggest some hope for "demilitarizing" the war, de-emphasizing
U.S. operational participation, and increasing GVN's ability to solve its
own internal problems using primarily its own human resources.

18
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
