Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C, III Marine Amphibious Force

To what extent the growing Marine emphasis on pacification was a factor
during the period before the Honolulu conference is impossible to deter-
mine; the timing and evidence would suggest that the impact of the Marine
strategy was greatest in the period after Honolulu, as they became more
sure of the rightness of their approach, and as they garnered more and
more publicity for it. Nonetheless, in the first eleven months of their
mission in I Corps, the Marines had gotten deeply into the pacification
program. The Marines thus became the most vocal advocates within the Armed
Forces for emphasizing pacification more, and search and destroy less.

The Marine deployments and mission are covered in earlier decision
studies in this series and will thus be treated only briefly here. The
emphasis of this section is not on the influence the Marines had on the
Honolulu conference, but on the way the Marines gradually moved into their -
new role, and the difficulties with it. The material here applied, there-
fore, equally to the pre- and post-Honolulu periods, throughout which the
Marine successes, as they reported them, had a growing impact on the think-
ing of civilian and military alike, in Saigon, CINCPAC, and Washington.

The Marines landed their first troops -- two Battalion Landing Teams --
in Dea Nang in March of 1965. Their original mission, "to secure enclaves
in the northern region of Vietnam containing air and communications in-
stallations, was simplicity itself." 29/ (From "U.S. Marine Corps Civic
Action Efforts in Vietnam, March 1965-March 1966, a study done by the USMC
Historical Branch, SECRET; hereafter referred to as MC History; from un-
paged draft. )

By the time of the Honolulu conference the Marines -- by now organized
into the III Marine Amphibious Force -- had changed their mission consider-
ably, and to @ degree then unequalled among other American units was deeply
engaged in pacification operations.

A monthly report issued by General Krulak, Commanding General, Fleet
Marine Force, Pacific, indicates the evolution of Marine thinking on their
mission. Reviewing the first seven months of their deployment in I eee?
the Fleet Marine Force, Pacific, wrote in September, 1965:

"The Mission assigned III MAF was initially confined
to airfield security. Subsequently, a limited offensive
responsibility was added, which has gradually grown to an
essentially unrestrained authority for offensive operations.
Finally, and largely on its own, III MAF has entered the
pacification program, with the bulk of its pacification
efforts taking place since June." [Emphasis added] 30/

One month later, after chronicling their successes, the report indicated

the major shift in strategic thinking which was taking place at General Walt's

headquarters in Da Nang, and at General Krulak's in Hawaii:

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
