Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CINCPACFLT was assigned Targets 33 and 36 of Option One, 2k of Option Two,
and 74 of Option Three. CINCPACAF was assigned Targets 39 of Option One,
. 32 of Option Two, and 14 of Option Three. Aircraft would be arméd with
optimum conventional ordnance for the target to be attacked, excluding
napalm. 31/

Operation Order FLAMING DART placed the US in a highly flexible
position. It provided a vehicle for a quick reprisal decision in the
eventuality of an attack on the DESOTO Patrol or of any other provocation,
such as a dramatic VC incident in South Vietnam. The particular targets
involved had been briefed to the principal decision-makers, had the virtue
of being known and understood by them, end even had their tentative appro-
val. Moreover, nearly all the targets were in the far south of North
Vietnam and all could be associated with infiltration, which were two of
the conditions laid down in the guidelines for retaliating against the
North for spectacular incidents in the South. The Oseration Order there-
fore served well as a generalized pre-planned reprisél target package,
offering a Wide spectrum of choices.

To gain an impression of the alert posture of the strike forces
poised for action, the table below sets forth the varying weight of
attack that could be brought to bear at different reaction times:

(CHART, vage 20)

The DESOTO Patrol, however, which had been the major focus for the
reprisal planning, was never to carry out its assigned role. On 4 Febru-
ary, three dsys before the Patrol was to begin its operation, the Chair-
men of the JCS informed CINCPAC and all interested posts and commands .
that authority to execute DESOTO was cancelled, in view of Soviet Premier
Kosygin's imminent four-day visit to Hanoi that was to begin on 6 February.
"DESOTO patrol concurrent with Kosygin visit or immediately thereafter,"
wrote the CJCS, "could be interpreted as reaction to visit, thereby im-
pairing erdcomolicating US-Soviet relations.” 33/

The decision to call off the Patrol in deference to Kosygin's visit,
reflected a growing feeling in some parts of the Administration that the
renewed involvement of the Soviet Union in Southeast Asia, after its
hands-off policy of almost three years' standing, might, on balance, be
a good thing for the U.S. While some American experts interpreted
Moscow's November, 1964 pledge of military assistance to Hanoi and
Kosygin's visit in February 1965 as a sure sign that the Soviet Union
saw the collapse of the US venture in SVN as imminent and wanted merely
to stake its claim in apoosition to Peking before it was too late, others
believed that the USSR might well find it in its interest to act as an
agent of moderation and compromise, providing the U.S. with an avenue of
graceful retreat from a seemingly irretrievable situation.

one TOP SECRET - Sensitive
