Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

very important lessons derived from the events which led us into World
War II. We feel that we've got to hang on to those lessons, because

if they lead us into world war III, there won't be much left from which
we can draw lessons and start over again.

"THREAT TO DURABLE PEACE
_ "Mr. Harsch: Mr. Secretary, is it not the question so much of our
vital interests, as of the threat to our vital interests?

"Now, you said yesterday that four Presidents have identified this
area as being strategically important to us. At the time that process
started--we're talking about President Truman now and then President
Eisenhower's time--there certainly did seem to be a major threat to our
interests in that area.

"What has happened to the nature of that threat? During the last
year I had in mind the breach between Moscow and Peking. Is there not
a diminution in the threat to our interests in that area because Moscow
and Peking are no longer close together?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, Peking has the capability of maintaining a
major threat there, depending upon both its policy and its action.

"You see, we have a very strong interest in the organization of
peace in the Pacific, just as we have in the Atlantic. We have alliances
with Korea and Japan and the Republic of China and the Philippines, Thai-
land, Australia, New Zealand. So, we are very much interested in the
stability of the peace in the Pacific Ocean area and in East Asia.

"Now, if these aggressive pressures from Hanoi, with the support of
Peking, should move into Southeast Asia, not only are hundreds of mil-

lions of people involved and vital resources involved, but the prospects
for a durable peace dissolve.

"And so we have a tremendous interest in establishing in that area
of the world, as we have done in the NATO area, the notion that the
nations must be left alone and be allowed to live in peace, as the
Charter of the United Nations provides."

x + .

65. Address by William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Fast
Asiar. and Facific Affairs, before the Commonwealth Club of California,

at San Francisco, California, January 20, 1967; "East Asia Today,”
Department of State Bulletin, February 27, 1967, p- 323.
* * *

"THE CONFIDENCE FACTOR

D-101°
