Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On March 2, the CIA made one additional input to the

deliberations, this time on the question of Soviet and Chinese aid

to North Vietnam. The intelligence offered was based on the report

of a high-level defector and concluded with a disturbing estimate of
how the Soviets would react to the closing of Haiphong harbor. In
summary this is what the CIA expected in the way of international com-
munist aid to Hanei:

International Communist Aid to North Vietnam
Summary

The USSR continues to provide the overwhelming share
of the increasing amounts of military aid being provided
+o North Vietnam and is willing to sustain this commitment
at present or even higher levels. A recent high-level
defector indicates that aid deliveries will increase even
further in 1968. He also makes it clear that there is
no quantitative limit to the types of the assistance that
the USSR would provide with the possible exception of
offensive weapons that would result in a confrontation
with the U.S. He also reports that the USSR cannot afford
to provide aid if it wishes to maintain its position in
the socialist camp.

This source does not believe that the recent increase
in aid deliveries reflects an awareness on the part of
European Communist power that the Tet offensive was imminent.

The defector confirms intelligence estimates that the
USSR has not been able to use its aid programs as a means
of influencing North Vietnam's conduct of the war. In
his opinion the Chinese are a more influential power.

Finally, the defector reports that the USSR will use
force to maintain access to the port of Haiphong. The
evidence offered to support this statement conflicts
sharply with the present judgment of the intelligence com-
munity and is undergoing extremely close scrutiny. 25/

Bundy's office at State furnished a copious set of papers

dealing with meny aspects of the situation tiat are covered in greater
detail in Task Force Paper IV.C.6. For our purposes I will consider
‘only some of the judgments offered about Soviet, Chinese and other

reactions to various courses of action against North Vietnam.

alternatives which were the basis of the appraisals of likely foreign
reaction were drafted by Bundy and approved by Katzenbach as follows:

154 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The basic
