Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In another eppendix, the memorandum enalyzed the effects of this
strategy on those interior provinces outside the "demographic frontier."
It would be desirable to maintain all interior Province capitals, the
appendix concluded, because "the political consequences of withdrawal from
whole Provinces would be to recreate the atmosphere of 1954 or 1965, and
while the situation may be that grim, we should at least strive to make
it appear otherwise."56/

The Province capitals would be garrisoned with ARVN units of the 22nd
and 23rd Divisions and, initially, some American units. These units would
have as their mission the holding of the Province town for a minimum of
four days, giving time for the arrival of a relief strike force.

Having secured the Province capitals, however, this strategy envisaged
evacuating other installations in the interior Provinces,

-«esuch as the frontier series running from Bu Dop to
Dak To and the interior but vulnerable points as Vo Dat
and Vinh Thanh, Although these points are not held by
allied main force units, they do tie down other assets,
such as Special Forces, CIDG, PF, and RF. Furthermore,
their combined existence represents a potential strain for
the limited reaction ability currently available since we
must respond, as we did at Dak To, when the enemy massed
for an attack. If a presence is required in some of these areas,
it should be in the form of a mobile striking unit, and not a
garrison.

Based upon this "analysis" of our current strategy and a strategy of
protecting the demographic frontier, the draft memorandum recommended the
following actions to the President:

1. Approve a NSAM, stating that our political objective
is a peace which will leave the people of South Viet Nam
free to fashion their own political institutions....The NSAM
should state that the primary role of U.S. military forces is
to provide security in the populated areas of South Viet Nem
rather than to destroy the VC/NVA or drive them out of the
country. We should plan on maintaining the posture necessary
to accomplish this objective for a considerable period.

2. Approve the immediate dispatch of an additional
10,500 military personnel to South Viet Nam.

3. Approve an accelerated and expanded program of
increased fire power and mobility for ARVIN and other ele-
ments of the GVN Armed Forces.

h. Send General. Taylor to Saigon to explain the NSAM
+o MACY and the GVN, and to request General Westmoreland to
develop a strategy and force requirements to implement the
military objectives stated in the NSAM.

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
