Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Don has heard personally that the military is
being blamed by Vietnamese public for the attack on the
pagodas, He said that the US Govt is at fault for this
misconception because VOA announced that the military took
action against the pagodas. Don queried why VOA did not
admit that Colonel Tung's Special Forces and the Police
carried out the action. Don believes this would help the
military at this point. Don stated that the USA should
now make its position known, 13/

In a conversation the same day with Rufus Phillips of USOM, General Kin,
deputy to General Don, bitterly attacked Nhu, charging him with responsi-
bility for the raids, and deploring his dominant role in the government.
He said that unless the popular impression that the army was responsible
for the raids were corrected, the army would be handicapped in its fight
against the VC. He stated that a finn U.S, stand for the removal of

the Nhus would unify the army and permit it to act against them,’ 1/
These two direct and obviously reinforcing requests for U.S. support

for military action aimed at Nhu's ouster marked the formal beginning

of the U.S, involyement in the protracted plotting against the Diem
regime, ‘Two senior civilians in the government, Diem's chef de cabinet,
Vo Van Hai, and Secretary of State, Nguyen Dinh Thuan, were simultaneously
telling U.S. contacts that Nhu's elimination from the government was vital
and that the U.S. should take a strong stand against him. 15/

On August 24, Lodge cabled his appraisal of the situation to
Washington, based on these conversations. "Nhu," he reported, "probably
with full support of Diem, had a large hand in planning of action against
Buddhists, if he did not fully master-mind it. His influence has also
been significantly increased." 16/ Nhu had simply taken advantage of the
concern of certain generals, possibly not fully informing the regular
army of the planned action. Nonetheless, none of the important Saigon
area troop commanders (Don, Dinh, and Tung) were presently disaffected
with the regime. Furthermore, absence of clear-cut military leadership
and troop strength in Saigon for a move against the Nhus would make U.S
support of such an action a "shot in the dark." 17/

For the State Department, the problem of clarifying the public
record about the raids and affixing responsibility for them had become
acute by August 24, The press reports emanating from Saigon had from
the outset blamed Nhu for the raids, but VOA, with a large audience in
Vietnam, continued to report the official U.S. position that the army
was culpable. 18/ The accumulating evidence against Nhu and the likeli-
hood of severe damage to army morale if VOA did not broadcast a clarifica-
tion seemed to call for retractions.

The second issue for Washington was Nhu. The generals had asked,
in effect, for a green light to move against him, but Lodge had cautioned
against it, Hilsman reports that as he, Harriman, Forrestal, and Ball
deliberated over the drafting of a reply on that Saturday morning, the
statement of Thuan to Phillips that "under no circumstance should the

14. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
