Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREL - Sensitive

IV.B.2, STRATEGIC HAMLET PROGRAM

1961 - 1963
SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS

A specific strategy by which the U.S. and GVN would attempt to end
the insurgency in South Vietnam had never been agreed upon at the time
that the U.S. decided, late in 1961, to increase materially its assist-
ance to GVN and to expand its advisory effort into one which would
implement a "limited partnership." By early 1962, however, there was
apparent consensus among the principal participants that the Strategic
Hamlet Program, as it came to be called, represented the unifying concept
for a strategy designed to pacify rural Vietnam (the Viet Cong's chosen
battleground) and to develop support among the peasants for the central
government.

The Strategic Hamlet Program was much broader then the construction
of strategic hamlets per se. It envisioned sequential phases which,
beginning with clearing the insurgents from an area and protecting the
rural populace, progressed through the establishment of GVN infrastructure
end thence to the provision of services which would lead the peasants to
identify with their government. The strategic hamlet program was, in
short, an attempt to translate the newly articulated theory of counter-
insurgency into operational reality. The objective was political though
the means to its realization were a mixture of military, social, psycho-
logical, economic and political measures.

The effect of these seavential steps to pacification was to make it
very difficult to meke intermediate assessments of progress. One could
not really be sure how one was doing until one was done. Physical
security by itself (the so-called "clear and hold" initial step) was a
necessary condition for pacification, not a sufficient one. The establish-
ment of governmental functions was not, by itself, necessarily conducive
to a successful effort; the quality of those functions and their respon-
siveness to locally felt needs was critical. This inherent difficulty in
assessing progress did not simply mean that it was difficult to identify
problems and to make improvements as one went along -- which it was. It
also meant that it was auite possible to conclude that the program as a
whole was progressing well (or badly) according to evidence relating only
to a single phase or a part of a phase.

A related problem arose from the unigueness of this program in
American experience -- pacification by proxy. ‘The theory of sequential

a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
