Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Concurrently, the Administration undertook to communicate to both
foreign and domestic audiences its determination to prevent Communist.
destruction of the Government of South Vietnam and to underline the
limited character of its objectives in Southeast Asia. A series of
"leaked" press analyses suggested that the most recent and the antici-
pated air strikes constituted a clear threat of extensive future destruc-
tion of North Vietnam!s military assets and economic investments. They
inferred that such consequences could be avoided if Hanoi would egree to
cease its direct support of the insurgency in the South.

At the same time, privately the State Department asked the Canadian
ICC representative Blair Seaborn again to act as a discreet intermediary
with Hanoi, conveying to the DRV leadership the same statement on Viet-
nam that had been handed by U.S. Ambassador Cabot to Chicom Ambassador
Wang Kuo-chuan in Warsaw on February 24, reaffirming that the United
States had no designs on the territory of North Vietnam, nor any desire
to destroy the DRV. On his March visit to Hanoi, Seaborn sought an
appointment with Prime Minister Pham Van Dong, but was obliged to settle
for a meeting with the chief of the North Vietnemese Army's Liaison
Section, to whom he read the statement. This officer commented that it
contained nothing new and that the North Vietnamese had already received
a briefing on the Warsaw meeting from the Chicoms. The Canadian Govern-
ment publicly noted in April that Seaborn had two important conversations
with DRV officials in recent months, but did not go into details.

In the closing days of February and continuing through the first
week of March, Secretary Rusk conducted a marathon public information
campaign to explain and justify the new U.S. policy and to signal a
seemingly reasonable but in fact quite tough U.S. position on negotia-
tions. In part, the Rusk campaign was precipitated by a press confer-
ence comment by U Thant at the United Nations on February 24, implying
that the U.S. had perhavs not been as zealous in its quest for peace as
it might have been. Thant went so far as to assert that "the great
American people, if they only knew the true facts and the background to
the developments in South Vietnam, will agree with me that further blood-
shed is unnecessary." The suggestion that the U.S Government wasn't
leveling with the U.S. public produced a sharp retort from Secretary Rusk;

We have talked over the past 2 years informally and on a
number of occasions with the Secretary-General...as well as
with many governments in various parts of the world...But the
proposals that I know about thus far have been procedural in
nature. The missing piece continues to be the absence of any
indication that Hanoi is prepared to ston doing whet it is
doing against its neighbors. ...This question of calling a
conference, under what circumstances -- these are procedural
matters. What we are interested in, what is needed to re-
store peace to Southeast Asia, is substance, content, and
indication that peace is possible in terms of the appetites
and the attitudes of the other side. 77/

60 TOP SECRET- Sensitive

