Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

projects have been imposed on the people without adequate
psychological preparation in terms of the benefits to be
gained. Since most of these projects call for sacrifice
on the part of the population (in the form of allegedly
"volunteer" labor in the case of construction, time away
from jobs or school labor in the case of rural youth
groups, leaving homes and lands in the case of regrouping
isolated peasants), they are bound to be opposed unless
they represent a partnership effort for mutual benefit on
the part of the population and the government....

"The situation may be summed up in the fact that the
government has tended to treat the population with sus-
picion or to coerce it and has been rewarded with an
attitude of apathy or resentment." 164/

4. The Founding of the National Liberation Front

Despite their expanding military effort, the Viet Cong
remained a formless, "faceless" foe until late in 1960, when the
National Liberation Front was announced as the superstructure of
the insurgent apparatus, and the political voice of the rebellion.
Thereafter, the Viet Cong sought publicity, and thereby acquired
identity as a South Vietnam-wide organization of three major com-
ponents: the NLF itself, the Liberation Army of South Vietnam, and
the People's Revolutionary Party.

a Organization and Objectives

The precise dates of the forming of the NLF con-
stitutes one of the puzzles of the war. As mentioned above, in the
years 1954 to 1960, peasants, captured documents and prisoners
referred frequently to "the Front," meaning the insurgent movement,
and "Front" flags had been captured as early as 1959. These were
probably references to Viet Minh carry-over organizations, such as
they were, rather than a specific leadership group or structure,
with a set of defined objectives. Nguyen Huu Tho, the first Chair-
man of the NLF, stated in a 1964 interview over Radio Hanoi that:

"Although formally established in December 1960,
the Front had existed as a means of action without
by-laws or program since 195) when we founded the
Saigon-Cholon Peace Committee....Many of the members of
the [/MLE/ Central Committee were also members of the
Peace Committee...." 165/

Huynh Tan Phat, Tho's Vice Chairman in the NLF, was reported in late
1955 serving on the "Executive Committee of the Fatherland Front"
(Mat Tran To Quoc), controlling joint Viet Minh-Hoa Hao operations
against the GVN in the Plain of Reeds. (CIA Memo 1603/66, I-27).

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
