Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

it to reach the urban markets. By the end of 1965 the retail price
indices showed that for middle and working class families in Saigon |
the cost of food was 41% higher than a year earlier. The general price
index, not including rent, for working class families was 33% higher

and for the middle class, 30% higher. 3h/ The upsurge in overt enemy
military activity in May and June was accompanied by a major campaign

to interfere with GVN lines of communication. Highway One and the rail-
way which parallel one another through the coastal provinces in I and II
Corps were both cut in numerous places. The road from Saigon to Da Lat,
over which moved much vegetable produce, was constantly harassed. By
the end of May, the town of Ben Cat in Binh Duong Province NW of Saigon
was isolated. 35/ In May the Viet Cong cut the Danhiem-to-Saigon power-
line and effectively prevented its repair. 36/

Through increased control in the agricultural producing areas,
very effective harassment of the primary means of communication within
the GVN, and selective application of military pressure, the Viet Cong
were waging a very successful campaign aimed at grinding the economy
of the GVN to a halt.

There wasn't much the GVN could do about it. The 11 battalions
of the RVNAF General Reserve were being "whipsawed" back and forth react-
ing to enemy military activity. By June the Reserve was already so
heavily committed that there was little additional combat power available
to the GVN with which to influence a rapidly detericrating situation,
military and economic. 37/

II.. The Brief Tenure of the Strategy of Security

A. Security as a Rationale

The rationale that got two Marine BLT's into Da Nang in March
1965, which was publicly announced and which caused surprisingly little
outcry, was plausibly advanced on several subsequent occasions as
additional troops were deployed to various locations in Vietnam. Whether
or not it was publicly offered as a rationale, the strategy of deploying
troops for the security of bases was short-lived. The Marines hardly had
their feet dry when several proposals were brought forward to get U.S.
troops actively engaged in the ground war. These proposals, the first of
which followed close on General Johnson's return from his Vietnam inspec-
tion trip of 5-12 March, 38/ were the center of much private debate in
the spring and early summer of 1965. That debate went on largely behind
the scene while the American public was in ignorance of the proceedings.
The strategy of security effectively became a dead letter on the first
of April, but the change in strategy was not revealed publicly until the
8th and 9th of June.

Dos TOP SECRET - Sensitive
