Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the will and resolve to oppose the VC be strength-
ened, and it must be if this war is to be won. 47/

Mr. Kirkpatrick's comment was based upon his recent trip to South
Vietnam:

I agree with the above but must note that :
even armed with your pessimistic comments following |
your last visit, I have been shocked by the. number
of our (CIA) people and of the military, even
those whose jobs is always to say we are winning,
who feel that the tide is against us. Admittedly,
this is based on a limited number of discussions
here and in Danang in three days. There are
ominous indications that the VC are able to mount
larger operations than in the past using bigger
arms, including antiaircraft. Vietnamese govern-
ment reactions are still slow, defensive and
reminiscent of French tactics here a decade ago.
There are still really no fundamental internal
security measures of any effectiveness such as
identity cards, block wardens, travel controls,
etc....I1t is evident that a major factor in VC
victories is their superior intelligence based on
nationwide penetrations and intimidations at all
levels....Finally, with the Laos and Cambodia
borders, opened, this entire pacification effort
is like trying to mop the floor before turning off
the faucet. 48/

Two days later the Secretary received an advance copy of SNIE
50-64, "Short-term Prospects in Southeast Asia." Its leading con-
clusion was: :

(a) That the situation in South Vietnam is very serious
and prospects uncertain. Even with U.S. assistance
as it is now, we believe that, unless there is a
marked improvement in the effectiveness of the
South Vietnamese government and armed forces, South
Vietnam has, at best, an even chance of withstanding
the insurgency menace during the next few weeks or
months. 9/ ;

In further explanation of this judgment, it was stated that the situa-
tion had been serious for a long time and in recent months it had
deteriorated further. The VC had exploited dislocations caused by
the November coup and then more recently by the January coup. Just

as Minh's reorganization was beginning to be established, Khanh's

coup upset everything, and Khanh's regime was not yet assessable.
Meanwhile, the VC had improved in their organization and armament,
were increasingly aggressive and acting in larger units.

.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
34
