Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to consider some action in Korea, Turkey, Iran, the Middle
East or, most likely, Berlin, where the Soviets can control
the degree of crisis better; and to show across-the-board
hostility toward the US (interrupting any on-going conver-
sations on ABMs, non-proliferation, etc.). China could be
expected to seize upon the harbor-mining as the opportunity
to reduce Soviet political influence in Hanoi and to dis-
credit the USSR if the Soviets took no military action to
open the ports. Peking might read the harbor-mining as
indicating that the US was going to apply military pressure
until North Vietnam capitulated, and that this meant an
eventual invasion. If so, China might decide to intervene
in the war with combat troops and air power, to which we
would eventually have to respond by bombing Chinese air-
fields and perhaps other targets as well. Hanoi would
tighten belts, refuse to talk, and persevere -- as it could
without too much difficulty. North Vietnam would of course
be fully dependent for supplies on China's will, and Soviet
influence in Hanoi would therefore be reduced. (Ambassador
Sullivan feels very strongly that it would be @ serious mis-
take, by our actions against the port, to tip Hanoi away
from Moscow and toward Peking.)

To US ground actions in North Vietnam, we would expect
China to respond by entering the war with both ground and
air forces. The Soviet Union could be expected in these
circumstances to take all actions listed above under the lesser
provocations and to generate a serious confrontation with
the United States at one or more places of her own choosing. 104/

The arguments against Course A were summed up in a final paragraph:

Those are the likely costs and risks of COURSH A. They
are, we believe, both unacceptable and unnecessary. Ground
action in North Vietnam, because of its escalatory potential,
is clearly unwise despite the open invitation and temptation
posed by enemy troops operating freely back and forth across
the DMZ. Yet we believe that, short of threatening and per-
haps toppling the Hanoi regime itself, pressure against the
North will, if anything, harden Hanoi's unwillingness to talk
and her settlement terms if she does. China, we believe, will
oppose settlement throughout. We believe that there is a
chance that the Soviets, at the brink, will exert efforts to
bring about peace; but we believe also that intensified
powbing and harbor-mining, even if coupled with political
pressure from Moscow, will neither bring Hanoi to negotiate
nor affect North Vietnam's terms. 105/
