Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

Subject: Suggested Reexamination of American Policy
with Respect to Indo-China

General Observations
1. The Japanese aggression against the French in Indo-China last
month hes brought about a marked increase in the number of proposals
advanced by the French for the use of French forces and resources in
the Pacific.

2. The consequences of these military developments make it clear
that our past policy, which held thet the disposition of Indo-China was
a matter for post-war determination and that the United States should
not become involved in military effort for its liberation, is in urgent
need of reexamination and clarification. This is particularly so in
order that American militery and naval authorities may have guidance to
enable them to take appropriate action with respect to the French pro-
posals referred to above.

3. Whe United States Government has publicly taken the position
that it recognizes the sovereign jurisdiction of France over French
possessions overseas when those possessions are resisting the enemy
and has expressed the hope that it will see the reestablishment of the
integrity of French territory. In spite of this general assurance, the
negative policy so far pursued by this Government with respect to Indo-
China hes aroused French suspicions concerning our intentions with
respect to the future of that territory. This has had and continues to
have a harmful effect on American relations with the French Government
and. people.

h, On April 3, 1945, the Secretary of State with the approval of
the President issued a statement of which the following excerpt is perti-
nent to the present problen:

"As to territorial trusteeship, it appeared desirable that
the Governments represented at Yalta, in consultation with the
Chinese Government and the French Proyisional Government, should
endeavor to formulate proposals for submission to the San
Francisco Conference for a trusteeship structure es a part of
the general organization, This trusteeship structure, it was
felt, should be defimed to permit the placing under it of the
territories taken from the enemy in this wax, as might be
agreed upon at a later date, and also such other territories

as might voluntarily be placed under trusteeship,"

our ¥ Tanne Gta bolas a
eS Bs 24 te Awa 4
Pos Weil

6
