Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

not bend or the CVN come apart." He indicated, however, that the Working
Group believed "that at least a contingent decision to go on is now re-
quired." To facilitate discussion on the part of the Principals, work-~
Sheets indicating proposed language or procedures were distributed, to
include the following action categories, 137/

1. U.S. public action

a. White House statement following 1 December meeting
b. Background briefing on infiltration

¢. Congressional consultation

d. Major Presidential speech

€. Public report on infiltration

2. Consultation with the GVN
3- Consultation with key allies
4, Communications with Communist nations

2. Existing forms of military actions (including recon-
naissance and RLAF strikes in Laos, GVN maritime
operations, etc.)

6. Reprisal actions resulting from DE SOTO Patrols and
"syectaculars"

{- Added military and other actions

Certain of these topics received more attention than others in
the course of the meeting, with emphasis being placed on "spelling out"
the exact steps that the Principals would be asking the President to
approve. With respect to actions aimed at the U.S. public, McGeorge
Bundy stressed that the Presidential speech must both (1) affirm U.S.
determination and (2) be consistent with the infiltration evidence.
General Wheeler stated that earlier infiltration reports could be defended
because of their small data base and suggested that the discrepancies
could be used to explain how the VC operated. It was determined thet one
man should be put in charge of assembling the available infiltration data
for public release, and Chester Cooper was suggested for the job. With
respect to coordination with the GVN, Ambassador Taylor pointed out the
need to prepare a draft statement to the GVN for the President's review
and agreed to prepare a table of the specific GVN actions needed.
Secretary Rusk ecknowledged the possible desirability of delaying until
GVN leadership issues were resolved, but that "anything now would cause
problems." Mr. Ball reminded that it would be necessary to query the
GV regarding release of some of the infiltration evidence.133/

"48 TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive
