Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

strategic concept calls for primary emphasis on_
giving security to the villagers. The tactics are
the so-called oil-blot approach, starting with a
secure area and extending it slowly, making sure
no Viet Cong pockets are left behind, and using
police units to winkle out [sis/ the Viet Cong
agents in each particular village. This calls

for the use of military forces in a different

way from that of orthodox, conventional war.
Rather than chasing Viet Cong, the military

must put primary emphasis on clear-and-hold
operations and on rapid reinforcement of villages
under attack. It is also important, of course,

to keep the Viet Cong regular units off balance
by conventional offensive operations, but these
should be secondary to the major task of extending
security... :

At the heart of this strategic ‘concept are
two basic principles:

The first is that of the oi1 blot. In the
past the GVN sought to blanket the whole country
_ with so-called strategic hamlets...The result was
to blanket the Delta with little Dienbienphus--
indefensible, inadequately armed hamlets far from
reinforcements...In effect these were storage
places of arms for the Viet Cong which could be
seized at any time. After November first, the
military began to demobilize some of these vulner-
able villages...and a race developed between the
government and the Viet Cong. The race may have
ended in a tie, but...the Viet Cong now have much
better weapons and greater stocks of ammunition
than they ever had. before.

The second basic principle is that the way
to fight a guerrilla is to adopt the tactics of
@ guerrilla...In spite of all our pressures, this
has never been done in Vietnam. Instead, the
emphasis has been on large operations...

» &s to the question of operations against
North Vietnam, I would suggest that such opera-
tions may at a certain stage be a useful supple-
ment to an effective counterinsurgency program,
but...not be an effective substitute...

My own preference would be to continue the
covert, or at least deniable operations...Then,

*

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
