Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
and technicians, but loft to Jater negotintions the detailed solution
of diplomatic, military, csonomic, financial, and technical matters.
(This agreement was, exeept for two uninportant words, exactly tha
samo a6 the one signed on dune 1948, by Bollacrt, Xuan, and Bao Dai.)
ec he would not cGeal with Ho. It wes

r

Bolinert is understood to have agre
arranged that the tio vould meet again in Fobrauary to make final arrange-
ments fer the return of Bac Dai to-Indocninna.

Bollacrt returned to France to explain his plans to his government
ana obtain its enproval. Fao Dai unexpectedly followed Bollaert, going
to Switscrlaw.: where ho had 4 meeting with M. Bollacrt in January. The
High Conmmissicner returned to Indechina on January 26 to prepare for
the meeting with Bao Dai scheduled for February. Tho latter, however,
went to France and was roceived by a number cf high government officials.
This infuriatce Bollaert, yho threatencd %o resign and was only placated
by an official statement that negotiations with Bao Dai would be cx~
clusively through hin. i

Events from this point on were confused. Obviously Bao Dai nad
reconsicercd his reluctant arreenent to return te tnnem and felt that
additional concessions and guarantees were essential if he were to
gain the support of sufficient Nationalist elements to insure stability
stay in France had opened his

3
pas
2.
-
ct
te
t3

w
a
-
mw

for his new government. In ac
eyos to the unstable position of the French government and the possi-
bility of a return to power of de GLULUD.

Bao Dai did not return to Heng Kong until Barch 14, 1948. The
following weeks were marked by much coming and going between Saigon
Kong of French and Vietnam representatives, and continually

changing rumors of the status of the negotiations. Apparently de-
spairing of persuading Bao Dai to return in the near future, Bollaecrt
agreed to set up a Provisional Central Vietnam Government which would
“prepare the way for the Emperor, who agreed to give his moral backing
to the now reginc.e

and Hong

The new government was headed by General Xuan, then President of
the Cochinchinese Government. Xuan, while an Annamite by birth, is a
general in the French frmy, a French citizen, and married to a French
woman. Eo was, of course, proz:ntly branded as a French puppet (which
is not believed to be true). Auan had great difficulty in persuading
persons of ability and influence to join his gevernmont, even with the
backing of Bac Dai, ane the team he collected tms very weak, particu-

larly as regards representatives from Tonkin.

m dune 5, 1948, Boilaort met with Xuan ond Bao, Dai, again ona

is ;
ernuisor in the Eaie d'Along, and a now agreement sms signed which was
almost exactly the same as the first one. Tha text was promptly made
public in contrast to the first protocol. 3) left 7

3 1 +t is Gay While Me Eollesrt ne

Switzerland the sam

afterizrda. President Aunn proo

