Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a GVN effort to improve "security and local government in the rural areas."
The statement closed with the following two paragraphs, which subsequent
events made to appear ironic but which were juxtaposed with great care:

"Together, the Government of Vietnam and the United States
mission are making joint plans to achieve greater effectiveness
against the infiltration threat.

"In the course of the discussions, the United States repre-
sentatives expressed full support for the duly constituted
Government of Prime Minister Huong." 201/

As the following section will show, the joint planning that had just
gotten underway for reprisal actions and Phase II operations was soon to
be halted. It was deferred for a period of about three weeks during the
forthcoming GV! crisis. However, as implicit in the quoted paragraphs
above, its resumption provided’ effective U.S. leverage to help bring about
an accommodation between the militery dissidents and the civilian regime.

b. GVN Crises. Late in the evening of 19 December, high-ranking
South Vietnamese military leaders, led by General Khanh, moved to remove
all power from the civilian regime of Premier Huong. The move came in
the announced dissolution of the High National Council, which had been
serving as a provisional legislature pending adoption of a permanent con-
stitution, and the arrest of some of its members. Air Commodore Ky, acting
as sookesman for the military, claimed that their intent was "to act as a
mediator /to resolve/ all differences in order to achieve national unity.”
The immediate apparent conflict was with the Buddhists who had been demon-
strating and threatening to provoke civil disorders in protest against the
Huong government. In Ambassador Taylor's view, however, the underlying
motive was growing entipathy with particular members of the High Netional
Council, brought to a head by the Council's refusal to approve a military
plan to retire General (Big) Minh from active service (and thus remove
him from a position to contend with the ruling military clique). Moreover,
the military had become quite impatient with the civilian officials. 202/

The general consensus among the 4mbassador, General Westmoreland
and State Department officials was that General Khanh's relationship with
the other influential generals and younger officers was rather uncertain.
Therefore, they sought to bolster Premier Huong's resolve to remain in
office on the basis of an understanding with the generals -- even to the
extent of seeking Khanh's resignation or dismissal. When presented with
U.S. views, Khanh gave initial appearances of recognizing that the mili-
tary seizure hau directly defied the U.S. policy position and the stipulated
basis for continuing joint Gvil/US efforts, and of accepting the need to
withdraw. However, he quickly attempted to turn the crisis into a direct
confrontation between himself and Ambassador Taylor. 203/ On the 22nd,
he issued a strong public affirmation of the military leaders’ actions,

. 69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
