Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

thinking is required here. Our thinking must be beamed
towards evolving a new concept of action - a synthesis of the
useable portions of history, the closely coordinated military
and political concepts of our enemy, and the application of
both conventional and unconventional warfare. All of these
welded together by proper application of the principles -
which will still remain valid - must be employed in the
operations of our hunter-killer teams of 'antiguerrilla
guerrillas.' For we must find a better way but only to
counter the Viet Cong guerrilla in the swamps, the canal-
gridded, inundated Mekong River delta, and the rugged
mountains and jungles of both the high plateau and the

entire land border region - but to crush him: . .

" . . . Militarily, our problem appears two-fold: First,
reduce or eliminate VC intervention from outside. Second,
prevent the growth and possible final complete military
success of VC military action, while awaiting solution of the
political 'causes'. This VC military success can happen
here - it is our job to prevent it. At present, better use
of military resources is Vietnam's only readily available
solution - and it is at best a marginal one.

"And finally, as a basis for your analysis, remember that
the conventional organizations such as corps, divisions and
regiments can be very adaptable to antiguerrilla operations... .-

_"I feel we should now reemphasize the basic actions and
recommendations already implemented by this MAAG to assure a
better RVNAF capability in fighting VC internal subversion by
setting up the framework of a more responsive organization and
command procedure. These actions included the following:

a. MAAG recommended the transfer of the Civil Guard
(CG) from the Department of Interior to the Department of
Defense for equipping, training and operational control with
command vested in RVNAF. ...

b. MAAG recommended to the RVNAF and the GVN that the
overall RVNAF command structure be modified to give clear
lines of military control for all military type operations. .. -

c. MAAG recommended a rotation plan which would
re-establish tactical unity and integrity of units, give
military commanders responsibility for pacification of a
permanently assigned area, and allow for rotation within
division or even possibly regimental size units - as 4
minimum.

85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
