Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Clifford Group principals convened on the afternoon
of Sunday, March 3, to consider this draft mero, Mr. Warnke read the
memo, completed only shortly before the meeting, to the assembled
group. The ensuing discussion apparently produced a consensus that
abandoning the initiative completely as the draft memo seemed to imply
could leave allied forces and the South Vietnamese cities themselves
more, not less, vulnerable. With respect to the bombing, opinion was
sharply divided. General Wheeler advocated the reduction of the
restricted zones around Hanoi and Haiphong and an expansion of naval
activity against North Vietnam. The Chiefs had apparently abandoned
for the moment efforts to secure authority for mining the approaches
to the ports, although this alternative was considered in the State
drafts. ISA on the other hand sharply opposed any expansion of the
air war but particularly in Route Packages 6A and 6B which a recent
Systems Analysis study had shown to be especially unproductive as an
anti-infiltration measure. 32/ As for negotiations, all were agreed
thet no>much could be expected in the near future from Hanoi and that
there was nO reason to modify the current U.S, position. The conclusion
of the long meeting was to request Warnke's working group to write an
entirely new draft memo for the President that: (a) dealt only with
the troop numbers issue, recommending only a modest increase; (b) called
for more emphasis on the RVNAF contribution to the war effort; (c) called
for a study of possible new strategic guidance; (d) recommended against
any new initiative on negotiations; and (e) acknowledged the split in
opinion about bombing policy by including papers from both sides. Thus,
after five days of exhausting work, the working group started over again
and produced a completely fresh draft for the following day.

3. The March 4 DPM

The new DPM was completed on Monday and circulated for
comment but later transmitted to the President without change.by
Secretary Clifford. In its final form this DPM represented the recom-
mendations of the Clifford Group. The main proposals of the memo
were those mentioned above. The specific language of the cover memo
with respect to bombing and negotiations was the following:

5. No new peace initiative on Vietnam. Re-statement
of our terms for peace and certain limited diplomatic actions
to dramatize Laos and to focus attention on the total threat
to Southeest Asia. Details in Tab E.

6. A general decision on bombing policy, not excluding
future change, but adequate to form a basis for discussion
with the Congress on this key aspect. Here your advisers

are divided:

LE TOP SECRET.- Sensitive
