Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the need to avoid situations "favorable to the common enemies /commu-
nism and colonialism in any form/ ," and of the military's resolve "not
to carry out the policy of any foreign country." On the 2th, informa-
tion was received that he intended to pressure Premier Huong into
declaring Ambassador Taylor personna non grata. 20h/

Administration reaction to this challenge indicated that it con-
sidered Khanh's defiance as a threat to the foundations of U.S. policy in
South Vietnam. Ambassador Taylor was instructed to inform Huong that the
U.S. Government regarded the PNG issue as a "matter of gravest importance,"
and that "any acceptance of /Khanh's/ demand or hesitation in_ rejecting
it would make it virtually impossible...to continue support [ot the/ GV
effort." Suggesting that Huong might asked if he thought the "American
People could be brought to support continued U.S. effort in SVN in face
[ot] PNG action against trusted Ambessador,” the Administration urged
persistence in encouraging Huong to seek an accommodation with the other
military leaders. Moreover, high-ranking MACY personnel were urged to
exploit their close relationships with South Vietnamese counterperts to
encourage such an arrangement. As leverage, Taylor was encouraged to
emphasize the intended directions of U.S. policy, subsequent to a
strengthened and stable GVN. Specifically, he was urged to point out
that joint reprisals for unusual VC actions and "any possible future
decision to initiate /the/ second phase” were impossible as long as
current conditions persisted. He was told, “without offering anything
beyond terms of your instructions you could use these to their fullest
to bring /Ky and the other generals/ around." 205/

There. is no indication in the available sources that this advice
was directly employed. It is evident, however, that Ambassador Taylor
had explained the dependency of further U.S, actions on GV! progress very
clearly to the key military leaders on 8 and 20 December. 206/ Therefore,
they were well aware that continued U.S. assistance along the policy line
explained to them was predicated on their cooperation, and this was
demonstrated early in the crisis. Even before Khanh's public declaration
of independence from U.S. policy, it became know that joint talks con-
cerning increased aid to the South Vietnamese war effort had been sus-
pended. A few days later that fact was given additional circulation,
with emphasis that this suspension included particularly any discussions
of measures to reduce the infiltration from Laos and North Vietnam. 207/

The degree to which the suspensions of joint planning actions
affected the judgments of the South Vietnamese generals is, of course,
not clear. What is apparent, harever, is that this factor together with
careful Embassy and Administration efforts to clarify possible misunder-
standings led the generals to reconsider. By 28 December, Ambassador
Taylor was reporting encouraging signs of an accommodation. 208/ On the
29th, Secretary Rusk advised the President that the "generals were having
second thoughts" and that "he hoped to see signs of political unity in
Saigon soon." These comments were made in close cooperation with reports

*

79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
