Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

backing and encouragement for broad reform ultimately would result in
a strong anti-communist South Vietnam. Or so the U.S. thought.

U.S. determination to back Diem was made with the knowledge
that French support for him was hardly enthusiastic. Guy La Chambre,
Minister for the Associated States, faulted Diem on three essential
points: Diem would oppose a representative government, oppose agrarian
reform and refuse to depose Bao Dai and create a republic. la Chambre
expected a new government would be necessary to give South Vietnam a

chance of winning the 1956 elections. 20/

America's economic policy for South Vietnam was designed
to yield immediate political advantage, cope with the staggering dis-
tortion of Vietnamese economic life and ease France out of economic
affairs. U.S. planners believed integration of land reform measures
with refugee resettlement would fill a triple bill: surplus land
distributed among the thousands of refugees would invite their political
support, facilitate assimilation of Tonkinese with Cochin-Chinese and
bring the land to full productivity. Aid would be given directly to
Vietnam as befitting its independence and as a means to accelerate
the "disassociation of France from (economic) levers of comnand." 21/
French domination in this area, it was thought, stifled Vietnamese
efforts and contradicted Vietnamese independence. It also inhibited
American economic interests. Militarily, the U.S. would build up
"indigenous military forces necessary for internal security...
working through the French only insofar as necessary." 22/ Exactly
how indigenous forces wovld be developed was not decided until December
1954, because France had some ideas about what to do and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff differed with State Department opinions as to the kind
of U.S. involvement required.

4, The U.S. "Chooses" Policy for France

In effect, these policy decisions of August 1954 asked
Mendes-France to overcome “French traditional interests and emotions
which have in the past governed the implementation of policy in Indo-
china." They asked for -- or demanded -- a "dramatic transformation
in French policy" because policy makers believed this was necessary
to "win the active loyalty and support of the population for a South
Vietnamese Government." 23/ The U.S. asked France to stay in Vietnam
militarily, to get out of Vietnamese economic and political life, but
at the same time Washington asked for French support and cooperation
in implementing U.S. programs. This was probably asking too much.

By December, the U.S. no longer asked for French support

but demanded it. By December, the qualified U.S. commitment to Diem
had hardened, U.S. involvement in Vietnam had deepened and U.S.

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
