Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the friendly populations, may count unreservedly on the vigi-
dJance and resolution of the government.

"It was our common task to try everything to spare the
blood of our children -- and also the blood that is not ours,
but which is blood all the same, that of a people whose right
to political liberty we recognized ten months ago, and who
should keep their place in the union of peoples federated
around France....

"Before all, order must be reestablished, peaceful order
which is necessarily the basis for the execution of contracts." })/

Premier Blum was succeeded within a week of his speech by the first
government of the Fourth Republic under Paul Ramadier. France sent three
emissaries to Vietnam at this juncture: Admiral d'Argenlieu, General
Leclerc, and the Socialist Minister of Overseas France, Marius Moutet.
Admiral d'Argenlieu became the High Comaissioner of Indochina, and
accused the Vietnamese of breaking faith with France. He stated emphat-
ically that France intended to preserve in Indochina:

",..the maintenance and development of its present influ-~
ence and of its economic interests, the protection of ethnic
minorities with which it is entrusted, the care of assuring
the security of strategic bases within the framework of defense
of the Federation and the French Union....

"France does not intend in the present state of evolution
of the Indochinese people to give them unconditional and total
independence, which would only be a fiction gravely prejudicial
to the interests of the two parties." 45/

The other two representatives of France were dispatched on fact-
finding missions. Their reports contained diametrically opposing policy
recommendations. General Leclere wrote:

"In 1947 France will no longer put down by force a group-
ing of 24,000,000 inhabitants which is assuming unity and in
Which there exists a xenophobic and perhaps a national ideal....

. "The capital problem from now on is political. It is a
question of coming to terms with an awakening xenophobic
nationalism, channeling it in order to safeguard, at least in
part, the rights of France.” 46/

The General had been sent to examine the military situation, and
returned recommending a political solution. The Socialist Marius Moutet
had been sent to inquire into the political prospects, and returned with
the conclusion that only a military solution was promising. Like

A-33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
