Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

++eeThe movement can be made considerably more
expansive and unreliable (a) by taking action to over-
load the roads and railroads (e.g., by destroying the
domestic source of cement), (b) by attacking the key
roads, railroads and bridge between Hanoi on the one hand
and Haiphong and China on the other, and (c) by pinching
the supply of POL, which is critical to ground movement
and air operations.

Amplifying one of these recommendations, McNamara commented that destruc-
tion of the plant, which produced 50% of North Vietnam's cement, would
make bridge and road rebuilding difficult. As for POL, he observed that
the facilities targeted represented 70-80%, of those in the country.
Though the North Vietnamese possessed reserves and had probably already
puilt up some in the South, their transportation system depended on a
continuous supply. They were known to have recently doubled their orders
for imported Soviet POL. Eventually, though not necessarily in the short
run, he said, they were bound to suffer a shortage.

While McNamara conceded that he did not expect the proposed
program to yield quick results in South Vietnam, he predicted that it
would ultimately have some effect. Addressing some political issues that
had influenced the previous hesitancy, he asserted that the South would
probably do nothing more than adopt "a somewhat harsher diplomatic and
propaganda line" and that the Chinese "would not react to these attacks
by active entry -- by ground or air," unless the United States took
further steps, the decisions on which "at each point would be largely
within our own control." And offsetting such risks stood the possibility
of favorable political effects. McNamara ventured no promises. He said,
"We would not expect Hanoi to change its basic policy until and unless it
coneluded that its chances of winning the fight in the South had become
so slim that they could no longer justify the damage being inflicted upon
the North." Nevertheless, he commented that destruction of POL facilities
"should cause concern in Hanoi about their ability to support troops in
South Vietnam" and concluded his memorandum by writing:

In the longer term, the recommended bombing program....

can be expected to create a substantial added»burden on North
Vietnam's manpower supply for defense and logistics tasks and
to engender popular alienation from the regions should shortages
become widespread. While we do not predict that the regime's

' control would be appreciably weakened, there might eventually
be an aggravation of any differences which may exist within the
regime as / tof the policies to be followed.

Reading this memorandum, one might conclude that the
Secretary, after passing through a season of uncertainty, had finally

. 88 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
