Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of March 30 on the Honolulu agreements said:

1. Assure that Province Chief actually retains op con

over necessery military forces to support program in his
Province. Status: In Long An Province two regiments of
the 25th Division are under Province control. This is
encouraging, but tactical situation elsewhere makes it
difficult. MACV plans to augment regular forces by 120
companies in 1966-67 (approximately 47 will go to priority
areas.) This augmentation if successful will be major step
forward.

2. Areas where the program is underway and four priority
areas in particular should be placed under superior Pro-
vince Chiefs who should not be removed while program is
underway without serious cause. Status: Since Honolulu,
eight Province Chiefs have been replaced. Most fall
within category mentioned by General Co at Honolulu when
he said GV) was about to make several changes to strengthen
their ability to achieve plans. The Mission continues to
emphasize at every level the need for continuity, but in
most cases it is dangerous for U.S. to go down the line in
support of individual Province Chiefs. 33/

“The Mission report on the status of "Revolutionary Development" for April
said;

RD remains behind schedule with progress slow. As reported
in.March, lack of effective leadership, military as well as
governmental, marginal local security, and late availability
RD cadre teams, continue to hamper program accomplishments. 3h/

The corresponding report for May said:

Lack of effective low-level leadership and lack of local
security continued to have adverse effects on RD program
---progress primarily reflects consolidation of hamlets

and population already under @ lesser degree of CVN control
rather then direct gains from VC control. There was no
appreciable expansion in secured area or reduction in VC-
controlled population. 35/

An incident in June highlighted the frustrations of U.S, field represen-
tatives, and showed that leverage could work, at least on procedural
matters. In Kontum, the Province Chief flatly refused to set up any end-
use control procedures (filling out requisitions, etc.) for USAID com-
modities. This refusal could not be accepted, and AID suspended all
commodity shipments to the Province. After four days, the Province Chief
gave in, and AID resumed shipments. 36/

= 23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
