Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Frankly we have no solution of problem to suggest. It
is basically matter for two parties to work out themselves
and from your reports and those from Indochina we are led to
feel that both parties have endeavored to keep door open
to some sort of settlement. We appreciate fact that Vietnam
started present fighting in Indochina on December 19 and that
this action has made it more difficult for French to adopt a
position of generosity and conciliation. Nevertheless we
hope that French will find it possible to be more than gener-
ous in trying to find a solution."

The U.S. anxiously followed the vacillations of France's policy
toward Bao Dai, exhorting the French to translate the successive "agree-
ments" they contracted with him into an effective nationalist alternative
to Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh. Increasingly, the U.S. sensed that
French unwillingness to-concede political power to Vietnamese heightened
the possibility of the Franco-Viet Minh conflict being transformed into
a struggle with Soviet imperialism. U.S. diplomats were instructed to
"apply such persuasion and/or pressure as is best calculated /to/ pro-
duce desired result [of France's/ unequivocally and promptly approving
the principle of Viet independence." France was notified that the U.S.
was willing to extend financial aid to a Vietnamese government not a
French puppet, "but could not give consideration of altering its present
policy in this regard unless real progress is/ made in reaching non-
Communist solution in Indochina based on cooperation of true nationalists
of that country."

As of 1948, however, the U.S. remained uncertein that Ho and the
Viet Minh were in league with the Kremlin. A State Department appraisal
of Ho Chi Minh in July 1948, indicated that: ;

"1. Depts info indicates that Ho Chi Minh is Communist.
His long and well-known record in Comintern during twenties
and thirties, continuous support by French Communist news-
paper Humanite since 1945, praise given him by Radio Moscow
(which for past six months has been devoting increasing attention
to Indochina) and fact he has been called "leading communist" by
recent Russian publications as well as Daily Worker makes any
other conclusion appear to be wishful thinking.

"2. Dept has no evidence of direct link between Ho and
Moscow but assumes it exists, nor is it able evaluate amount
pressure or guidance Moscow exerting. We have impression Ho
must be given or is retaining large degree latitude. Dept
considers that USSR accomplishing its immediate aims in Indo-
china by (a) pinning down large numbers of French troops, (b)
causing steady drain upon French economy thereby tending retard
recovery and dissipate ECA assistance to France, and (¢c) denying
to world generally surpluses which Indochina normally has avail-
able thus perpetuating conditions of disorder and shortages

A-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
