Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

position. The Co-Chairmen gambit, however, languished -- and
eventually came to naught. The first ROLLING THUNDER strike was
finally rescheduled for Feb 26. This time adverse weather forced
its cancellation and it was not until March 2 that the first of
the new program strikes, dubbed ROLLING THUNDER V, was actually
earried out.

In the closing days of February and during early March, the
Administration undertook publicly and privately to defend and pro-
pound its rationale for the air strikes, stressing its determination
to stand by the GVN, but reaffirming the limited nature of its
objectives toward North Vietnam. Secretary Rusk conducted a
marathon public information campaign to signal a seemingly reason~-
able but in fact quite tough US position on negotiations, demanding
that Hanoi "stop doing what it is doing against its neighbors
before any negotiations could prove fruitful. Rusk's disinterest
in negotiations at this time was in concert with the view of virtually
all the President's key advisors, that the path to peace was not then
open. Hanoi held sway over more than half of South Vietnam and could
see the Saigon Government crumbling before her very eyes. The balance
of power at this time simply did not furnish the U.S. with a basis for
bargaining and Hanoi had no reason to acceed to the hard terms the
U.S. had in mind. Until military pressures on North Vietnam could
tilt the balance of forces the other way, talk of negotiation could
be little more than a hollow exercise.

Evolving a Continuing Program. Immediately after the launching
of the first ROLLING THUNDER strike, efforts were set in motion to
increase the effectiveness, forcefulness and regularity of the program.
US aircraft loss rates came under MclNamara's scrutiny, with the result
that many restrictions on the use of U.S. aircraft and special ordnance
were lifted, and the air strike technology improved. Sharp annoyance
was expressed by Ambassador Taylor over wnat he considered an unneces-
sarily timid and ambivalent US stance regarding the frequency and
weight of U.S. air attacks. He called for a more dynamic schedule
of strikes, a several week program, relentlessly marching North, to
break the will of the DRV. Army Chief of Staff General Johnson,
returning from a Presidential survey mission to Vietnam in mid-March,
supported Taylor's view and recommended increasing the scope and
tempo of the air strikes as well as their effectiveness. The President
accepted these recommendations and, beginning with ROLLING THUNDER VII
(March 19), air action against the North was transformed from a
sporadic, halting effort into a regular and determined program.

Shift to Interdiction. In the initial U.S. reprisal strikes
and the first ROLLING THUNDER actions, target selection had been
“completely dominated by political and psychological considerations.
With the gradual acceptance, beginning in March, of the need for a
militarily more significant sustained bombing program, a refocusing

9 ya TOP SECRET - Sensitive
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
