Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The paper, then, concluded that the larger forces of Option I and
TA would “greatly reduce risks to Free World forces in SVN and will ac-
complish U.S. ebjectives more rapidly than the forces of the other
options," and recommended that immediate action be taken to provide the

forces of Option I.

Read another way, however, the Joint Staff analysis could be taken
to indicate that the United States could successfully pursue a strategy
of “population security" by adopting Option ITI, adding 50,000 troops
to the current level in SVN,

At the 2 March meeting of the senior members of the Secretary of
Defense's Working Group conducting the reassessment, no consensus was
reached on & new U.S. strategy. Apparently, Mr. Warnke and Mr. Goulding
were given the task of drafting a new memorandum for the President which
would be less controversial than the initial ISA document.

The draft memorandum for the President, dated 3 March 1968, which
was prepared by these two individuals, differed markedly in tone from the
initial memorandum presented to the Clifford Group on 2 March. Gone was
any discussion of grand strategy. This memorandum recommended simply:

1. Meeting General Westmoreland's request by deploying as
close to May 1 as practical 20,000 additional troops (approximately
1/2 of which would be combat).

2. Approval of a Reserve call-up and an increased end
strength adequate to meet the balance of the request and to
restore a strategic reserve in the United States, adequate for
possible contingencies.

3. Reservation of the decision to deploy the balance of
General Westmoreland's new request. While we would be in a
position to make these additional deployments, the future
decision to do so would be contingent upon:

a. Continuous reexamination of the desirability of
further deployments on a week-by-week basis as the situation
develops;

b. Improved political performance by the GVN and
inereased contribution in effective military action by the

ARVN;

‘ c. The results of a study in depth, to be initiated in-
mediately, of a possible new strategic guidance for the conduct
of US military operations in South Vietnam.

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
