Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"On December 14, 1961, President Kennedy wrote to President Diem,
recalling the United States declaration made at the end of the Geneva
conference in 1954. The President once again stated that the United
States was ‘prepared to help the Republic of Viet-Nam to protect its
people and to preserve its independence.’ This commitment has been ~
reaffirmed many times .since.

"These, then, are the commitments we have taken to protect South
Viet-Nam as a part of protecting our own "peace and security." We
have sent American forces to fight in the jungles of that beleaguered
country because South Viet-Nam has, under the language of the SEATO
treaty, been the victim of ‘aggression by means of armed attack.'"

F *

"Up to this point I have tried to describe the nature of our
commitments in South Viet-Nam and why we have made them. TI have sought
to put those commitments within the framework of our larger effort to
prevent the Communists from upsetting the arrangements which have been
the basis for our security. These policies have sometimes been attacked
as static and sterile. It has been argued that they do not take account
of the vast changes which have occurred in the world and are still in

train.

"These contentions seem to me to miss the point. The line of
policy we are following involves far more than a defense of the status
quo. Tt seeks rather to insure that degree of security which is neces-
sary if change and progress are to take place through consent and not
through coercion. Certainly, as has been frequently pointed out, the
world of the mid-20th century is not standing still. Movement is
occurring on both sides of the Iron Curtain. Communism today is no
longer monolithic; it no longer wears one face but many, and the deep
schism between the two great power centers of the Communist world--
Moscow and Peking--is clearly one of the major political facts of our
time. :

"There has been substantial change and movement within the Soviet
Union as well-~and perhaps even more among the countries of Eastern
Europe. These changes have not been inhibited because of our efforts
to maintain our postwar arrangements by organizing the Western alliance.
They have taken place because of internal developments as well as
because the Communist regime in Moscow has recognized that the Western
alliance cannot permit it to extend its dominion by force.

"Over time the same processes hopefully will work in the Far East.
Peking--and the Communist states living under its shadow--must learn
that they cannot redraw the boundaries of the world by force.

“What we are pursuing, therefore, is not a static concept. For,
unlike the Communists, we really believe in social revolution and not

D-67
