108.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

commendable amount country-side travel by ministers. On other hand,
report was received of high-level bickering over powers and authority
of new central intelligence organization (FVS-6487), and Diem ex-
pressed dissatisfaction with pace of field command's planning of
counter-insurgency operations, but he has still not delegated sufficient
authority to field command. A111 in all we unable report that Sept saw
progress toward attainment task force goals of creating viable and
increasingly democratic society. Some such 'shot in arm' as proposed
joint communique seems desirable.

Series large scale VC attacks in various areas central Vietnam
during month highlighted increased VC infiltrations through Laos and
underscored urgency of free world policy toward Laos which would
bring this situation under control. These VC actions plus temporary
VC seizure of provincial capital of Phuoc Thanh demonstrated that
tide not yet turned in guerrilla war... 19/

The "shot in the arm" Nolting referred to was the communique on social reforms
that was agreed to some weeks earlier at the time of the Staley Mission; it
would finally be issued, in a watered down form, early in January. The con-
trast between White's and Nolting's reporting is sharp: White obviously would
not have seen the issuing of a commmique as a significant "shot in the arm,"
or commented on the VC show of strength in such mild terms as demonstrating
"that tide not yet turned.” Consequently, although Diem's request for a treaty
(a day after this cable was sent) surprised Nolting, its effect at the White
House was presumably to confirm the warning that had already been received
through White.

The State Department's view of the situation seems also to have been
graver than that of the Embassy in Saigon. We have a situation summary on
Southeast Asia that refers to Nolting's cable but not to Diem's treaty request,
and which consequently must have been distributed about October 1. On the
political situation in South Vietnam, the summary quotes Nolting's "no progress’
comments. But the military situation is described more bleakly than Nolting
did.

SOUTH VIET-NAM - MILITARY

1. Although GVN military capabilities have increased, Viet Cong
capabilities are increasing at more rapid rate and Viet Cong attacks
have increased in size. :

2. Viet Cong 'regular' forces have increased from about 7,000 at
beginning of year to approximately 17,000.

3- Viet Cong have moved from stage of small hands to large units.
During September Viet Cong mounted three attacks with over 1,000 men
in each. Viet Cong strategy may be directed at ‘liberating’ an area
in which a 'government' could be installed.

4, Although vast majority of Viet Cong troops are of local
origin, the infiltration of Viet Cong cadres from North Viet-Nam via

cS, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
