not

.S

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

amount in practice to effective command. Again, the judgment
of all senior people in Saigon, with which we concur, is that
the possible military advantages of such action would be far
out-weighed by its adverse psychological impact. It would
cut across the whole basic picture of the Vietnamese winning
their own war and lay us wide open to hostile propaganda both
within South Vietnam and outside. Moreover, the present
responsiveness of the GVN to our advice -- although it has not
yet reduced military reaction time -- makes it less urgent.
At the same time, MACV is steadily taking actions to bring
U.S. and GVN operating staffs closer together at all levels,
including joint operating rooms at key command levels. 94/

Thus, it was stated national policy that the critically important
struggle in South Vietnam must be won by the South Vietnamese, that the
U.S. would do all within its power to help arrest and reverse a deteri-
orating situation, and that plans should be made to employ graduated
overt military pressures against the supporters of the insurrection, the.
DRY. This was the principal thrust of NSAM 288 even though a sizeable
portion of the document was devoted to programmatic steps which GVN and
the U.S. should take in order better to mobilize South Vietnam's assets.
Specifically, RVNAF needed to be increased in size by at least 50,000
men, reorganized, and provided with selected items of modern equipment. 95/
These programs presaged more U.S, advisors because there would be more
RVNAF units to advise, but there was no mention of more advisors for given:
units or advisors to perform new functions.

INCREASING POLITICAL INSTABILITY IN THR PROVINCES

The dark picture painted in NSAM 288 in March had become even darker
by May 1964. Secretary McNamare visited Saigon on 12 and 13 May to inquire
into progress in the "oilspot" national pacification program. What he
learned could scarcely be called encouraging. A follow-on conference
was scheduled for 1 June in Honolulu and the planning wheels began to
turn -~ or, more accurately, the wheels began to churn -- for there was
barely two weeks' time in which to propose and coordinate U.S. actions
acceptable to the GVN which might reverse the downward spiral of events,
and "going North" was not yet feasible in terms of domestic U.S. politics.

Tllustrative statistics (the same which Secretary McNamara saw) give
the tone of events in South Vietnam. In an effort to determine exactly
how many rural communities even existed -- much less whose control they
were under -- the Department of Defense had earlier initiated en aerial
photographic survey of the rural areas of RVN. Even this expensive under-
taking left great factual gaps. In Tay Ninh Province, for example,
photointerpreters identified 39 fortified hamlets; U.S, reports from
provincial officials claimed that there were 106. 96/ The discrepancy
was not one to appeal to those who wished to base policy determinations
on solid facts.

he TOP SECRET - Sensitive
