Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Geneva and the ICC notwithstanding, to amalgamate the Temporary Equipment Re-
covery Mission (TERM) with the MAAG; action was initiated to obtain ICC con-
currence. Early in May the press learned of this plan, and a story was pub-
lished that "the US is doubling its military training staff in South Vietnam
and stepping up the training of Vietnamese troops for guerrilla warfare
against Communist terrorists:" The release stated that:

"The decision reflects concern about the mounting strength and
poldness of Communist bands which are raiding the villages and
assassinating Vietnamese officials. However, US military and diplo-
matic officials said the Communist campaign is not a ‘Terisis'’ and in
itself, is not likely to become a major threat to the government of
President Ngo Dinh Diem. Guerrilla warfare specialists will be in-
eluded among the 350 additional military trainee officers and men
sent to Vietnam."

On 5 May 1960, the day this story was released, Senator Mansfield wrote a
letter to General Williams in Saigon quoting the press dispatch, and asking
the General to explain:

"I do not mind telling you that I was personally very impressed
with that portion of your testimony which suggested to me that you
were directing the military aid program in a fashion which was,
wisely, aimed at working MAAG 'out of a job' and that you had about
reached the point where the scaling down could pegin. Therefore, it
came as something of a surprise to me to learn...that we intend to
double the training staff of MAAG in Vietnam by adding to it 350 men.

General Williams' reply (MAAG Saigon, telegram to OSD/ISA, MAGCH-CH691,
of 200711Z, May 1960) informed the Senator of the MAAG-TERM merger, but went
on to say:

"It is my personal opinion MAAG should and can work itself
‘out of job' with possible reduction approximately 15% in June
1961 and approximately 20% reduction yearly thereafter. Depend-
ing of course on readings taken at subsequent dates."

General Williams’ ideas, however, were not integrated into the CIP. He left
Saigon prior to the completion of the plan, and in any event the mounting

intensity of the internal war precluded any further consideration of "phased
withdrawal" before 1962.

81 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
