Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

e. The Erskine Report, Part I: Motivate the French

The first section of Erskine's two-part report, dated
February 6, 1954, was based on the assumption that U.S. policy toward
Indochina would not require resort to overt combat operations by U.S.
forces. Within that framework, the report adhered closely to the Defense
Department position that the French, if properly motivated, could win in
Indochina, but that their failure to carry through on needed reforms
would require U.S. consideration of active involvement. The report
noted that:

"There is in Indo-China, or programmed for Indo-China...,
a sufficient amount of equipment and supplies and a potential
manpower pool sufficient eventually to defeat the Communists
decisively if properly utilized and maintained and if the
situation continues to permit this manpower to be converted
into military effectiveness. Success will ultimately be
dependent upon the inspiration of the local population to
fight for their owm freedom from Communist domination and
the willingness of the French both to take the measures to
stimulate that inspiration and to more oa utilize the
native potential."

The Erskine Report (Part I) recommended: (1) augmentation
of the French air force, but not using American personnel; (2) additional
U.S. military assistance support of $124 million (supplementing FY 1954
commitments of $1.115 billion); (3) elevation of MAAG's status to that
of Military Mission, with expanded personnel and advisory authority over
training and planning; (4) assignment of additional U.S. personnel with
the mission of acting as instructors and performing other key duties
within the French forces; (5) Presidential letters to the Heads of State
of the Associated States reaffirming our support of their independence
and explaining our motivations in assisting them through the French;

(6) an effort be undertaken to persuade Bao Dai to take a more active ©
part in the anti-Viet Minh struggle. The report concluded that the
program of recommended changes could bring about victory over the Viet
Minh if it received full French approval and barring Chinese intervention.

f. The Erskine Report, Part II: Intervention Only After Geneva?

The second part of the Erskine Report did not appear until
March 17, 1954, and unlike the first, was the responsibility only of the
Defense Department and the Joint Chiefs, with the State Department position
"reserved." The report confirmed previous determinations that the loss
of Indochina would be a major military and political setback for the
United States. It recommended that prior to the start of the Geneva
Conference, the U.S. should inform Britain and France that it was interested
only in military victory in Indochina and would not associate ourselves with
any settlement which falls short of that objective. It further recommended
that in the event of an unsatisfactory outcome at Geneva, the U.S. should

B-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
