Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Now, as Secretary McNamara has told you, a serious doubt
hangs over our hopes for the future. Can we win together in
the face of the reaction to the measures taken by your Govern-
ment against the Buddhists and the students? As a military man
I would say that we can win providing there are no further
political setbacks. The military indicators are still generally
favorable and can be made more so by actions readily within the
power of your Government. If you will allow me, I would mention
a few of the military actions which I believe necessary for this
improvement."

The Chairman noted that though the military situetion in I, II, and
III Corps: areas was generally good, some of the hard-core war zones of
the Viet Cong remained virtually untouched. There were not enough offensive
actions against the enemy in the field and, in his opinion, the full poten-
tial of the military wits was not being exploited, for "...only a ruthless,
tireless offensive can win the war."

The principal military problems, he pointed out, were now in the
Delta, and the time had come to concentrate efforts there. An over~
haul of the Strategic Hamlet Program was needed. For it to succeed,
there must be a related clear-pnd-hold campaign by the combat units
of IV Corps, and the tactics should be oriented to the waterways that
were a natural characteristic of the region. Furthermore, infantry
line units would have to operate at full strength, without diversion
of combat power to rear echelon functions. The CJCS suggested that this
latter problem was the case in ARVN generally, which President Diem
might want to examine closely.

Finally he summed up what was intended as the statement of the US
position; ;

"In closing, Mr. President, may I give you my most impor-
tant overall impression? Up to now, the battle against the
Viet Cong has seemed endless; no one has been willing to set
a date for its successful conclusion. After talking to scores
of officers, Vietnamese and American, I am convinced that the
Viet Cong insurgency in the north and center can be reduced to
little more than sporadic incidents by the end of 1964. The
Delta will take longer but should be completed by the end of
1965. But for these predictions to be valid, certain conditions
must be met. Your Government should be prepared to energize all
agencies, military and civil, to a higher output of activity than
up to now. Ineffective commanders and province officials must
be replaced as soon as identified. Finally, there should be a
restoration of domestic tranquility on the homefront if political
tensions are to be allayed and external criticism is to abate.
Conditions are needed for the creation of an atmosphere conducive
to an effective campaign directed at the objective, vital to both

20 TOP SECRET + Sensitive
