Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The question was raised whether the French mission in Hanoi
was in fact negotiating with Ho Chi Minh. General Gallagher
replied that the Viet Minh Provisional Government was at first
willing to negotiate; then in October, after de Gaulle's pro-
nouncements on colonial policy, the Annamese refused to negotiate
with the French and reacted vigorously against all French nationals
in Hanoi. The Chinese may succeed in putting in a less anti-
French Annamese government so that negotiation might go forward.
All French efforts to stimulate a palace revolution against Ho
were of no avail. Ho himself will not deal with the French. The
Viet Minh is strong and, regardless of possible superficial changes
in the Provisional Government, Ho will be behind any continuing
Annamese movement. General Gallagher said that Sainteny had told
him he expected peaceful agreement between the French and the
Annamese would be reached by negotiation.

"General Gallagher was asked how effective the Viet Minh admin-
istration would be with neither French nor Chinese forces present.
He replied that on the whole he was impressed by the remarkably
effective Annamese administration. There was an able personnel;
they were all enthusiastic and young, but there were too few of
them. Whatever their technical skill, they perhaps lack executive
ability and experience since the technical services in Hanoi were
at first very well rum but gradually deteriorated. Trained people
for the government and at the municipal level are lacking. In
General Gallagher's opinion the Annamese are not yet ready for
self-government and in full-fledged competition with other nations
they would ‘lost their shirts.' However, the demand for inde-
pendence is widespread and even in the villages the peasants refer
to the example of the Philippines.

"Ho is willing to cooperate with Great Britain, USSR, or the
United States and would perhaps even settle for French tutelage if
that were subordinated to control by the other nations. French y
control alone, however, will be strongly resisted. The deep-seated
hatred for the French has been fanned by exceedingly clever Viet
Minh propaganda.

"General Gallagher was asked whether the Annamese were realistic
regarding their ability to stand up against French military force.
While they are too enthusiastic and too naive, he said, they prob-
ably know that they will be licked. They are strong on parades
and reiterate their willingness 'to fight to the last man,’ but
they would be slaughtered and they have been told that and probably
know it. The Annamese would be no match for forces with modern
arms even if they themselves have some, which they may have since
the Chinese found no Japanese rolling artillery and numerous Japanese
anti-aircraft guns seem to have completely disappeared. United States
Army representatives never did learn the extent of arms controlled
by the Viet Minh. Certainly the Chinese are not turning Japanese
arms over to them. Before V-J Day the Japanese undoubtedly had

B-y TOP SECRET - Sensitive
