Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

re STiulC TD

Vietnam end has harassed the French ever since. His
followers who sre estimated at approximately 75,000
armed men, with probebly the same nuinber unarmed. Ris
hesdquarters are unknown.

The French counter efforts have included,- on the
military side, the deployment of approximately 140,000
troops, of whom the apwroximetely 50,000 are local natives
serving voluntarily, African.colonials, and a herd core
made up of French troops and Foreign Legion units. Ho Chi
Minh's guerrilla tactics have been aimed at denying the
French control of Vietnem. On March 8, 194.9 the French
President signed an esreement with Bao Dai as the Head of
otate, granting independence within the French Union to
the Government of Vietnem. Similar agreements were
signed with the sing of Laos end the Kings of Cambodia.

kKecent developments have included Chinese Communist
victories bringin, those troops to the Indochina border;
recosnition of ho Chi Minh as the head of the legal
Government of Vietnam by Communist Chine (18 January)
and by Soviet nmussia (30 January).

li. necognition by the United Stetes of the three
legally constituted governments of Vietnam, Leos and
Cambodia appeers desireble and in eccordance with United
States foreign policy for several regssons. Among them
ares; encouragement to national aspirations under non-
Communist leedership for peoples of colonial areas in
Southeast Asia; the establishwent of stable non-Com#unist
governments in areas udjacent to Communist China; sup-
port to a friendly country which is also a signatory to
the North Atlancic Treaty; and as a demonstration of
displeasure with Communist tactics vhich are obviously
aimed at eventuel domination of Asie, working under the
guise of indigenous nationalism.

Subject to your adproval, the Department of State
recommends’ thet the United Stctes of Anerica extend
recognition to Vietnam, Leos and Cembodis, following
ratification by the French Government.

(signed) DrLaN achrson

Approved
9(signed)
Harry §° Truman .
February 3, 1950
HES TiatC TaD
