Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

nature and full significance of these latter developments would not be
revealed until the climactic Cuban Missile Crisis a few months later, the
U.S. was already apprehensive of serious danger on its very doorstep.
Official interpretive evaluations at the time saw 6n intimate causal nexus
petween Berlin and Cuba.

Finally, another set of factors altering the strategic configuration
in Southeast Asia and affecting the U.S. position there also came to a
head in mid-summer of 1962. These were developments regarding Laos, which
impinged upon and helped reshape the U.S. relationship toward Vietnam.
In the fall of 1961 and through the spring of 1962 the U.S., its objec-
tives frustrated in Laos, had decided to salvage as much as possible by
settling for neutralization. After lengthy and complex diplomatic maneuver-
ing, this was essentially achieved by early summer. On 23 July 1962 the
1y-nation declaration and protocol on the neutrality of Laos was signed
formally, ending the 15-month Geneva Conference on Laos. The outcome
nad at once the effect of extricating the U.S. from one insoluble dilemma.
and serving as a stark object lesson for another. The laos settlement
now both allowed the U.S. a free hand to concentrate on Vietnam and pro-
vided the incentive and determination to bring to a close its military
commitment there as well -- but this time successfully.

It was in this spirit and context that the U.S. decided to pursue
actively the policy objective of divesting itself of direct military involve-
ment of U.S. personnel in the Vietnam insurgency. The aim was to create
militarily favorable conditions so that further U.S. military involvement
would no longer be needed. To this end, two prerequisites had to be satis-
fied: bringing the insurgency effectively under control; and simultaneously,
developing a militarily viable South Vietnam capable of carrying its own
defense burden without U.S. military help. In phase with the progress
toward both these goals, there then could be proportionate reductions in
U.S. forces.

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE HONOLUIMU DECISIONS OF JULY 1962 2/

In July 1962, as the prospect of the neutralization of Laos by the
Geneva Conference became imminent, policy attention deliberately turned
toward the remaining Vietnam problem. At the behest of the President,
the Secretary of Defense undertook to reexamine the situation there and
address himself to its future -- with a view to assuring that it be brought
to a successful conclusion within a reasonable time. Accordingly, he
called a full-dress conference on Vietnam at CINCPAC Headquarters in Hawaii.
On 23 July, the same day that the 1-nation neutralization declaration
on Laos was formally signed in Geneva, the Sixth Secretary of Defense
Conference convened in Honolulu.

The series of briefings.and progress reports presented at the con-
ference depicted a generally favorable situation. Things were steadily

ao: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
