Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

reinforced his pessimistic views of the previous December. In his trip
report to the President, he said: :

"CG, he situation has unquestionably been growing worse,
at least since September:

1. In terms of government control of the country-
side, about 40% of the territory is under Viet Cong control
or predominant influence....

2. large groups of the population are now showing
signs of apathy and indifference, and there are some signs
of frustration within the U.S. contingent:

a. The ARVN and paramilitary desertion rates,
and particularly the latter, are high and increasing.

b. Draft dodging is high while the Viet Cong
are recruiting energetically and effectively.

e. The morale of the hamlet militia and of
the Self Defense Corps, on which the security of the hamlets
depends, is poor and falling.

3. In the last 90 days the weakening of the govern-
ment's position has been particularly noticeable....

ral hk. The political control structure extending from
Saigon down into the hamlets disappeared following the Novem-
ber coup. Of the 41 inewnbent province chiefs on November 1,
35 have been replaced (nine provinces had three province chiefs
in three months; one province had four), Scores of lesser
officials were replaced. Almost all major military commands
have changed hands twice since the November coup. The faith
of the peasants has been shaken by the disruptions in experi-
enced leadership end the loss of physical security. In many
areas, power vacuums heve developed causing confusion among
the people, and a rising rate of rural disorders.”

"), The greatest weakness in the present situation is
the uncertain viability of the Khanh government...After two
coups, as was mentioned above, there has been a sharp drop
in morale and organization, and Khanh has not yet been able
to build these wp satisfactorily. There is a constant threat
of assassination or of enother coup, which would drop morale
and organization nearly to zero. Whether or not French na-
tionals are actively encouraging such a coup, de Gaulle's
position and the continuing pessimism and anti-Americanism
of the French community in South Vietnam provide constant
fuel to neutralist sentiment and the coup possibility. If
& coup is set underway, the odds of our detecting and pre-
venting it in the tactical sense are not high.

vii oe Y TOP SECRET - Sensitive
