Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The Consul at Saigon (Reed) to the Secretary of State

RESTRICTED Saraox. March 7, 1946—T p. m.
[Received Maveh 7—1:35 p. m.]

20. Spokesman for the Government in Tndochina announced signing
of agreeinent vesterday at Hanoi whereby Vietnam becomes a free
state wifliin the Tndochina federation and will have own army, direct
own internal affairsand finance. Further negotiations on other points
such as foreion atfairs, French economic taiterests, et eetera. to he
held shortly. Referepdiain to be held in Tonkin, Annam and Cochin
China to determine form of government desired and they may be
separate or may unite. Full text of agreement will be forwarded?

> Telerram 21, Morel & 1946, not wrtnted. Despateh +444, Moreh &, from
Paris, euclosed copy of text as translated from fhe Paris Fives. of the prelin-
inary convention signed at Tani, March Goat 4 p. mo: neither printed.
Spokesman cenchided that many concessions on both sides, Annamites
are frankly pleased and French military occupation now preceeding
smoothly.

Reep

SECRET a7 Satcgox, March 1-4, 1946—5 p. m.
[Received March 16—9: 2-4 a. in.]

33. Information from north indicates Chinese putting many ob-
stacles in way of French, and Saigon press queries Chinese intentions.
Clarne reviewed worsening situation in detail, mentioning mexpected
last minute refusal Chinese General Staff to sion agreement for relief
Chinese by French (to begin before March 15, to end before March 51)
becanse needed approval Combined Chiefs of Staff. This has heen
[apparent garble] but Clarac not clear if they have acted, also adding
MacArthur?’ had said if was not his business which Clarae found

“General of the Army Douglis MncArthur, Supreme Conunander for the
Allied Forces, Japan. :
astonishing in view of Mountbatten’s* approval of relief British by

# Adm, Lord Touts Mounthatten, Supreme Alied Comminnder, Southeast Asia.
French south of 16th Ppoaratel], Tle is worried as Chinese digging
trenches TTaiphong and encireling citadel, TTanoi fears serious clash
but hopes! Lu Tan's arrival yesterday may ease tension, also Lu may
have authority to implenient relief agreement. Clarac’s information

= Polearan 35, Mareh 15, 116, 10 yp. m., from Saigon, reported that the Sino-
French military avtremuent was signed of Chimeking on Mareh 14, thereby imple-
mentins the earlicr agvesuent for relief of Clinese br french ferees (151.-
98/3-104i1).
¥rom China shows growing Chinese sentiment against Vietminh-
Frevich seveement probably based en Chinese [fear of 7] Comiinist
state sath of Cliina and also [die?] to failure Chinese snonsored
party to have higeer role in Vierminh. Tnereasine nuniber incidents
Saieon and elsewhere but on whole Aiimamites willing to work out

agreement as planned and general belief Hf Chinese had net changed
attitude things would lave eoue well,

63

REED
