Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On April 21, Marc Jacquet, French Secretary of State for the
Associated States, told the American Ambassador to Indochina, Donald Heath,
then in Paris, that no French military authority still believed a victory
was possible in Indochina without United States air and naval intervention,
and that such action should be indicated after the impending failure of
the Indochina phase of the Geneva Conference. 3'

On April 22, Foreign Minister Bidault, with General Ely, sug-
gested to Secretary Dulles that there should be emergency consultation
between General Navarre and American military commanders in Indochina.

The Foreign Minister indicated that, although he had been opposed to inter-
nationalizing the war, he would now favor it with United States participa-
tion if that would save Dien Bien Phau. 38/

On April 23 the French Under Secretary of State, André
Bougenot, in the presence of Premier Laniel, suggested to Douglas MacArthur
iI, Counselor of the Department of State, that the United States could
commit its naval aircraft to the battle at Dien Bien Phu without risking
American prestige or committing an act of belligerency by placing such
aircraft, painted with French insignia and construed as part of the French
Foreign Legion, under nominal French command for an isolated action con-
sisting of air strikes lasting two or three days. 39/

On the same day Foreign Minister Bidault showed the Secretary
a message from General Navarre in which the French commander said that the
situation at Dien Bien Phu was desperate and that he believed that the only
alternatives were (1) Operation VAUTOUR, massive B-29 bombing (which
Secretary Dulles understood would be a United States operation from bases
outside Indochina), or (2) a French Union request for a cease-fire (which
the Secretary assumed would be at Dien Bien Phu only, but which General
Navarre, as it turned out, meant should apply to all of Indochina). 4o/

kh. Finel U.S. Position Before Geneva

a. Exchanges with the French

The American response to these various suggestions was to
reiterate to the French the necessary preconditions for American inter-
vention: (1) complete independence for the Associated States; (2) Con-
gressional authorization; (3) a coalition that would include the United
Kingdom. 41/ In relation to the need for a coalition, Secretary Dulles
in Paris and Under Secretary W. Bedell Smith in Washington suggested to
French officials that France, in the same way as it had asked for American
air intervention in Indochina, should appeal for British intervention
there. h2/

_ Before leaving Paris for Geneva, Secretary Dulles gave Foreign
Minister Bidault a letter replying to General Navarre's suggestion that
United States air intervention at Dien Bien Phu was the sole alternative
to a cease-fire. In this letter, the Secretary stated again the necessary

B-28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
