Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

they live in as either peripheral or crucial. Perhaps in those halcyon
days when the Congress of Vienna was the supreme example of intelligent
diplomacy, such distinctions had meaning. The introduction of Marxism-
Leninism into world society and the visible determination by its mili-
tant exponents to implement that doctrine through ‘wars of national
liberation' has today obliterated such distinctions. Sd has the expan-
sion of technology, which has made this a shrinking world of inter-
dependent nations."

ee ee

"ATTITUDE OF COMMUNIST CHINA

"But President Johnson has spoken to ears which hear only the echo
of their own doctrine. It is not Dennis Healey nor Robert McNamara but
the Red Chinese Minister, Marshal Lin Piao, who wrote 6 months ago, and
I quote: ;
"We know that war brings destruction, sacrifice, and suffering
on the people. (But) the sacrifice of a small number of people in
revolutionary wars is repaid by security for whole nations....war can
temper the people and push history forward. In this sense, war is a
great school....In diametrical opposition to the Khrushchev revisionists,
the (Chinese) Marxist-Leninists...never take a gloomy view of war.'

: "Marshal Lin Piao's statement didn't come out of thin air. In his
pook Problems of War and Strategy Mao Tse-tung wrote, and this was
before 1949:

"The seizure of power by armed forces, the settlement of an
issue by war, is the central task and the highest form of revolution.'

"When Mao wrote these words, he lacked nuclear capability. Today
the story is different, and the implications of his words and those of
Marshal Lin are more dreadful.”

~ oe

46. Vice President Humphrey Reports to President on Asian Trip, White
House Press Release of March 6, 1966; Department of State Bulletin,
March 28, 1966, D. E90.

e << 3

"3. The significance of the struggle in Vietnam is not simply
the defense of a small nation against powerful neighbors. Vietnam is,
in a larger sense, the focus of a broad effort to restrain the attempt
by Asian Communists to expand by force--as we assisted our European
allies in resisting Communist expansion in Europe after World War II.

D-72 —
