Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~SEGHEL, J

American Consulate General, ae
Ssigon, Indochina, March 31, 1949.

MEMONANDUM CN INDOCHINA Por Nitv DELEL FOREIGN SERVICES CONFERENCE

atheto® es

SECTION IT. POLITICAL SECTION

Oa a ae ee mee re ee ere

* ‘Annax Hoo 2

north of _Fobruary
wh ee Prins
sons ho eould

a]

: Feverish
and the early
Hinistas Ques
not live up c
to Pepe ool fOr Fai Si, Pao DAT's returns He felt that
the only cnaneco te obtain a faverahle vote would be after, tne Peper OR
had returned and estat stable goverment which appoared to ~
havs o fair chanes of winning the support of a majority of his people

77
and reatoring peace, Sao Pai finally accepted this but Was adaman’
thet the goining of Cochinchina te the Vietram must bo on accomplished
fset befora ho arrived ia Indochina. "y i

ies argss over how this was to be accomplished.’ Tha”.
ar-cut Way was to act under the paragraph of the French,
governing alignation or acquisition of Franch terri she
aw transferring the colony of Cochinchina to tha BESO of
Vietnans However, it was argued, Pirss that this would roguisre ty
refarendun of the people affected--impossible to hold undor prose
_conditions=«and second, the proper nsthod was to s at undor paragyra
“25 pormivting a changes in statue of parts of ths Fronch Unions . Th
requires a voto by tho French Assonbly aftor #8 roguost fron tha
Vferritorial Asseablys The constitusienal exports argued that no
proper Banetely had ever been established in Cochinchina sines tho

existing Ass nmoly de Sud Vietnam had beon appointed and not elocteds

“Phe Cabines harriedly drafted and submitted to tho French Parliarons:
n bill to sot up a Torriterial Assembly. This bill was jamod: en
through ths Assenbly of She Fronch Union, be French Asaenbly and -

the Council of tha Republic in a weak of all night dobates. Tho
Socislist Party's wealmess for Eo Chi HINH and opposition to Bao
Dai bro in the first cebata and the govsrnront received heavy
fo jorities from then on, only tho Communists tonaclously opposins

tne billa

ae
4

nA Oo

The next stops ere the “eloction" of the new assembly, a vote
by it of « pavition to change Cochinchina from a colony to an x3
Wiassociated Stats” to join the Vietnam, and thon a new seriss
of votes in sho F Sarlinvent to implement this. Thia must all
bo acsomalishsd b il 25, ths date aet for the Enmeror's rotur:
to Indochinaze It ifficult to ste how 16 eas ho done and a
postponenont of & Ls arrival in Saigon can ba anticioated.

% should

