Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Cat tall |
rz

*

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

assigned to South Vietnam between now and the end of this
year;.../and/ the probable requirements for additional forces
next year. 8

This request for “probable requirements for additional forces next year"
seemed to be an attempt to improve the quality of planning figures for
1966. In his 1 July Draft Memorandum for the President, McNamara quoted
Westmoreland as saying that he “cannot now state what additional forces
may be required in 1966 to gain and maintain the military initiative...
Instinctively, we believe that there may be substantial U.S. Force Re-
quirements." The memorandum went on to comment that "He /COoMUSMACV/
has a study underway, with a fairly solid estimate due in early August.
The number of battalions ultimately required could be double the 4h
mentioned above. 9/

According to the MACV Command History of 1965, General Westmoreland
answered Secretary McNamara's question about forces required in 1966
during the Secretary's Saigon visit. 10/ General Westmoreland "antici-
pated that a need would exist for an inerease of 2 maneuver battalions,
14 artillery battalions; 3 air defense (Hawk) battalions; 8 engineer
battalions; 12 helicopter companies; 6 helicopter battalions, and addi-
tional support units." 1i/ As reconstructed by the MACV Command History,
this requirement was predicated upon a concept of operations in South
Vietnam and upon a three phased plan:

-COMUSMACV's objective was to end the war in RVN by con-
vincing the enemy that military victory was impossible and
to force the enemy to negotiate a solution favorable to the
GVN and the US. To secure these objectives, US/FWMA forces
would be built up and then employed to wrest the initiative
from the enemy, secure vital areas and support the GVN in
expanding its control over the country.

The overall concept was based on three assumptions:
(1) That the vc would fight until convineed that
military victory was impossible and then would not be willing

to endure further punishment.

(2) That the CHICOM's would not intervene except to
provide aid and advice:

(3) That friendly forces would maintain control of the
air over RVN.

The concept visualized a three-phase operation:

Phase I - The commitment of US/FWMA forces necessary
to halt the losing trend by the end of 1965.

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
