Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is the purpose of this study to reconstruct the immediate
circumstances that led up to the U.S. reprisal decision of February”
1965, to retrace the changes in rationale that progressively trans-
formed the reprisal concept into a sustained graduated bombing
effort, and to chronicle the relationship between that effort and
the military-political moves to shore up Saigon and the military-
diplomatic signals to dissuade Hanoi, during the crucial early
months of February through May of 1965.

%¥ XX HH % *

Background to Pleiku. the growing realization, throughout 1961,
that the final consolidation of VC power in South Vietnam was a distinct
possibility, had led to a protracted US policy reassessment and a
determined search for forceful military alternatives in the North that
might help salvage the deteriorating situation in the South. The
proposed program of graduated military pressures against North Vietnam
that emerged from this reassessment in late 196) had three major
objectives: (1) to signal to the Communist enemy the firmness of U.S.
resolve, (2) to boost the sagging morale of the GVN in the South, and
(3) to impose increased costs and strains upon the DRV in the North.
Underlying the rationale of the program was the hope that it might
restore some equilibrium to the balance of forces, hopefully increasing
the moment of US/GVN bargaining leverage sufficiently to permit an
approach to a negotiated solution on something other than surrender
terms.

Throughout the planning process, (and even after the initiation
of the program) the President's principal advisors differed widely in
their views as to the intensity of the bombing effort that would be
desirable or required, and as to its likely effectiveness in influencing
Hanoi's will to continue its aggression. The JCS, for example, con-
sistently argued that only a most dramatic and forceful application
of military power would exert significant pressure on North Vietnam,
but firmly believed that such application could and would affect the
enemy's will. Most civilian officials in State, OSD, and the White
House, on the other hand, tended to favor a more gradual, restrained
approach, "progressively mounting in scope and intensity," in which
the prospect of greater pressure to came was at least as important
‘as any damage actually inflicted. But these officials also tended,
for the most part, to have much less confidence that such pressures
would have much impact on Hanoi's course, making such equivocal
assessments as:: “on balance we believe that such action would have
some faint hope of really improving the Vietuamese situation."

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
