CY

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.

term, increasingly heavy. Trade is the key to a durable Japanese eco-
nomy.

"One of Japan's greatest opportunities for increased trade lies
in a free and developing Southeast Asia. So we see that the two prob-
lems I have been discussing are two parts of 4 single one--the great
need in Japan is for raw materials; in Southern Asia it is for manu-
factured goods. The two regions complement. each other markedly. So,
by strengthening Viet-Nam and helping insure the safety of the South
Pacific and Southeast Asia, we gradually develop the great trade poten-
tial between this region, rich in natural resources, and highly indus-=
trialized Japan to the benefit of both. In this way freedom in the
Western Pacific will be greatly strengthened and the interests of the
whole free world advanced. But such a basic improvement can come about
only gradually. Japan must have additional trade outlets now. ‘These
ean be provided if each of the industrialized nations in the West does
its part in liberalizing trade relations with Japan."

cae ce ta

26. Special Message to the Congress on the Mutual Security Program,
February 1 1960, Public Papers of the Presidents--Kisenhower, -
1960, p. 170.
Bnet WO sil? Biel

* * *

"The Mutual Security Program is a program essential to peace. The
accomplishzents of the Mutual Security Program in helping to meet the
many challenges in the mid-20th Century place it among the foremost of
the great programs of American history. Without them the map of the
world would be vastly different today. The Mutual Security Program-and
its predecessors have been an indispensable contributor to the present
fact that Greece, Turkey, Iran, Iaos, Vietnam, Korea and Taiwen, and
many nations of Western Europe, to mention only part, remain the home
of free men. ,

"While over the past year the Soviet Union has expressed an inter-
est in measures to reduce the common peril of war, and while its recent
deportment and pronouncement suggest the possible opening of a somewhat
less strained period in our relationships, the menace of Communist
imperialism nevertheless still remains. The military power of the Soviet
Union continues to grow. Increasingly important to free world interests
is the rate of growth of both military and economic power in Communist
China. Evidence that this enormous power bloc remains dedicated to the
extension of Coumunist control over all peoples everywhere is found in
Tibet, the Taiwan Straits, in Laos and along the Indian border.

"In the face of this ever-present Communist threat, we must, in our
own interest as well as that of the other members of the free world com-
munity, continue our program of military assistance through the various

B-51
