Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

JOP SECRET - Sensitive

Iv. A. 4.

U.S. TRAINING OF THE VIETNAMESE NATIONAL ARMY, 1954-1959

SUMMARY

"Hanoi was evacuated on 9 October /19547. The /U.S. liaison/
team left with the last French troops, disturbed by what they
had seen of the grim efficiency of the Viet Minh in their
takeover, the contrast between the silent march of the
victorious Viet Minh troops in their tennis shoes and the
clanking armor of the well-equipped French whose western
tactics and equipment had failed against the communist
military~political-economic campaign." 1

Up to 1960, Vietnam was one of the largest recipients of U.S.
economic and military assistance in the world: the third ranking
non-NATO recipient of aid, the seventh ranking worldwide. The U.S.

. Military Assistance Advisory Group, Vietnam (MAAG), was the only
military mission commanded by a lieutenant general; the U.S. economic
aid mission in Vietnam was the largest anywhere. In the years 1955
through 1960, more than $2 billion in aid flowed into Vietnam, and
more than 80% of that assistance went toward providing security for
the Government of Vietnam. Nonetheless, in 1960 the Joint Chiefs

of Staff determined that the armed forces of the Republic of

Vietnam (RVNAF) were inadequately trained and organized, and directed
urgent action by MAAG to improve their anti-guerrilla capabilities. 2/

. Thus, despite the massive U.S. investment in’aid to Vietnam in
the period 1954-1960, very little had been accomplished in the way of
fashioning South Vietnamese forces into a suitable instrumient for
countering the "communist military-political-economic campaign"
aimed at overturning the Government of Vietnam.

The principal issue examined here is that of the role and
effectiveness of U.S. advice and assistance provided the armed forces
of the GVNV prior to 1960.

The principal focus is on American assistance to the Vietnamese
National Army -- subsequently the ARVN -- although plans and support
for the Civil Guard-and Self-Defense Corps are also considered.
Subsidiary questions include:

-- Why did the U.S. undertake the training of ARVN?

-- How was this decision taken?
