Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The honesty of both French and Vietnamese officials is
questionable in connection with recent incidents. O'Sullivan
(U.S. Vice-Consul, Hanoi) believes the Vietnamese were re-
sponsible for the November 20 incident, but it seems clear
that with a different French commander at Haiphong than
Colonel Debes, who is notorious for graft and brutality and
who has admitted that he cannot control his own troops, the
trouble might have been confined to the original incidents.

"According to the French, the Vietnamese enlarge their
claims after each agreement and are so impractical and
doctrinaire that all conversations are ineffectual. The
Vietnamese feel that the French renege on each agreement
and are trying to reestablish control. However, both say
they have approximately the same objectives, although Giap
says Vietnam opposes a political Indochinese federation but
favors a federation dealing with common economic problems.
Moffat has mentioned to the French three apparent basic
troubles: (a) complete mutual distrust, (b) failure of the
French to resolve their own views on 'free state within
French Union’, (c) almost childish Vietnamese attitude and
knowledge of economic questions and vague groping for
‘independence’. Agreement cannot be reached by trying to
reach accords on incidental problems. Basic Vietnam powers
and relations with France must first be established. Not
only new faces are needed but neutral good offices or even
mediation may be essential." *

The U.S. official position remained essentially unchanged there-
after. A few months later, after fighting broke out in North Vietnam,
Secretary of State Marshall stated that:

"Furthermore, there is no escape from fact that trend of

times is to effect that colonial empires in XIX Century sense

are rapidly becoming thing of past. Action Brit in India and

Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are outstanding examples this

* U.S. Department of State Telegram, from Washington, 17 December
1946.

C-bh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
