Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In summarizing its assessment of the consequences of Communist
control in South Vietnam, the Working Group stated:

"There are enough 'ifs' in the above analysis so that it
cannot be concluded that the loss of South Vietnam would soon
have the totally crippling effect in Southeast Asia and Asia
generally that the loss of Berlin would have in Europe; but it
could be that bad, driving us to the progressive loss of other
areas or to taking a stand at some point /so that/ there would
almost certainly be a major conflict and perhaps the great risk

of nuclear war." 56/

- b. Evolution of Options. The alternative courses of action
perceived by the Working Group went through e fairly rapid evolution.
As conceived by Chairman Bundy and John Mellaughton, who apparently
collaborated in their initial formulation, the ovtions would offer a
wide range of military actions and diplomatic postures. As the views
of other members and interested officials were expressed, and as it
became more apparent how little flexibility was perceived with respect
to national objectives, subtle changes occurred. The effect was to
narrow somewhat the range of effects which the different options mighs
achieve and to tend to blur the distinctions between them. However,
the process occurred so early in the life of the Working Group that it
is difficult to pin-point the changes and somewhat presumptuous, relying
only on documentary evidence, to explain them.

The perceived options were three in number, labeled A, B, end
C. Option A essentially was a continuation of military and naval actions
currently underway-or previously authorized, to include prompt reprisals
for attecks on U.S. facilities or other VC "spectaculars" in South
Vietnam. These were to be accompanied by continued resistance to a
negotiated settlement unless stringent preconditions, amounting to
agreement to ebide by U.S. interpretations of the Geneva Accords, were
met. Option B consisted of current policies plus a systematic program
of progressively heavy military pressures against North Vietnam, to be
continued until current objectives were met. Negotiations were to be
resisted, as in "A," although to be entered ultimately, but they were to
be carried on in conjunction with continued bombing attacks. Option C
combined current policies with (1) additional -- but somewhat milder --
military pressures against North Vietnam and (2) a declared willingness
to negotiate. Once negotiations were begun, the military pressures were
to stop, although the threat to resume was to be kept alive.

In a general sense, these distinctions remained constant through-
out the Working Group's effort. However, subtle changes occurred. In
the initial conception of "B," it was perceived as "meshing at some point
with negotiations,” based on an underlying assuuption that negotiations
would probably be unavoidable. 57/ The full analysis of this earliest
form of "B" (discussed more fully later) makes it clear that some kind
of international discussions would probably begin fairly early and con-
tinue as the intensity of our military pressures mounted. 58/ Moreover,

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
