*

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I wish I could describe the feeling of hope which this great
American presence on the ground is bringing. There can no longer
be the slightest doubt that persistence will bring success, that
the aggression will be warded off and that for the first time
since the end of WW II, the cause of free men will be on an up- -
ward spiral. 2h/

lodge's end-of-month appraisal was that civil and political progress
lagged behind the military. He felt there would be a political vacuum
that the VC would fill if the U.S. pulled out. Therefore,he was trying
to start a program to provide security and to generate indigenous
political activity at the hamlet level. He noted with pleasure that,
Ky was taking the initiative in bringing his pacification plans to
Lansdale, to get U.S, reactions before these plans were too firm to
change. 25/

By September, a combination of inflation, black-marketeering by U.S;
troops and other related problems led both governments to agree on im-
portant steps. The U.S, introduced military payment certificates, and
the GVN agreed to exchange 118 piasters to the dollar for personal use
of troops and U.S. civilians. Official U.S, purchases of piasters con-
tinued at the old exchange rate of 35, however. 26/

September brought an evaluation of the three-month three-province
pacification experiment during which each was under the unified control
of a team chief; one en embassy FSO, one a MACV sector adviser, and one
an AID province representative. COMUSMACV judged that test only partially’
successful; progress achieved was attributed to the "keen spirit of cooper-
ation" by all team members. Because he believed the results inconclusive
and in view of the existing military situation, General Westmoreland con-
cluded that the team chief concent should not be implemented. The experi-
ment was officially ended.

The U.S, also became deeply involved in the rice trade. Vietnam
changed over from a rice exporter in the years through 1964 to a heavy
importer from 1965 onwards. AID provided the imported rice under CIP.

In September, 196, Ambassador Lodge spoke of measures we are taking to
control the price of rice; inasmuch as AID provided the imports, USOM
head a say in the GVN's policies on price control, subsidization, and dis-
tribution of rice. 27/

During this period a problem flared up over a corrupt, Province Chief.
Tt. Colonel Chi, Province Chief of Binh Tuy, was accused of misuse of
$250,000 cf AID funds. After pressure from ATD had merely produced threats
against the lives of AID personnel in the province, on September 23 AID
withdrew them and suspended AID to the province. Chi was a protege of

‘ General Co, the Minister of Defense and Deputy Premier, who himself figured

in charges of corruption a year later. On October-5, the story got into

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
