Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

opportunities to urge Diem and others to adopt at least the most
important suggestions of his demarche of October 14; moreover, the
Ambassador now emphasized the necessity for leverage, as well as
persuasion, in inducing him both to institute political reforms and
to accept the basic principles of the MAAG Counter-Insurgency Plan:

"Since it far from certain Diem will introduce sufficiently
appealing and effective new programs and use his present security
forces in most efficacious manner, we must find suitable means
to bring pressure on him. As I outlined in Bmbtel 1105 as well
as in memorandum this subject (letter to Parsons Nov 8) I am
convinced, even if we eventually should agree, that we should
not now accord his request for 20,000 additional force or concur
in his unilateral action to raise force level (Chief MAAG 1537
Dec 1 = copy JCS). To do so without his having relaxed controls,
instituted effective reforms and having permitted efficient use
present forces, would not save the day for Diem but might even
induce him follow his instinct to rely primarily on use of
force both to control population and fight VC. While I am not
fully convinced need for extra 20,000 men, I would be willing
to concur in such addition if careful study by all concerned
concurred in this recommendation. (MAAG views on urgent need
for 20,000 increase forwarded Parsons my letter Nov 30th)
therefore, suggested this matter be carefully studied Washington
and if final recommendation is favorable it be kept secret as
ace in the hole to grant Diem provided he has taken other
necessary steps which are to me much more fundamental, and
provided he needs extra force after taking more essential
steps. If, for instance, at the beginning next year he has
taken effective steps along lines suggested above and it is
still considered he needs increased force level we could so
inform him then. But in meantime, in view his threat to raise
foree level unilaterally, I should be instructed soonest to
taut suitable opportunity to state while force level increase
is under consideration Washington cannot now see its way clear
to grant such increase when other more important steps are
essential at present in fight against VC and to make further
progress Viet-Nam.

"In summary, situation in Viet-Nam is highly dangerous to
US interests. Communists are engaged in large-scale guerrilla
effort to take over countryside and oust Diem's Government.
Their activities have steadily increased in intensity throughout
this year. In addition Diem is faced with widespread popular
dissatisfaction with his government's inability to stem the
communist tide and its own heavy-handed methods of operation.
It seems clear that if he is to remain in power he must meet

é} TOP SECRET - Sensitive
