Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In this memorandum, McNamara reveals with striking clarity that many
of the premises under which the war to that point had been fought (and
manned) were shifting.

He agreed with COMUSMACV that the military situation has gone
“somewhat better in 1966 than anticipated,” but he found little cause
for optimism in the longer run. In fact, he seemed almost disheartened
as he noted that there was "no reasonable way to bring the war to an
end soon." Finding an injured but undismayed opponent committed now to
"waiting us out" while sapping our national will and seeing "pacification
& basic disappointment...no better, and if anything worse off..." hardly
was the kind of progress he hoped for.

His solution was to get ourselves into "a military posture that we
eredibly would maintain indefinitely -- a posture that makes trying to
‘wait us out' less attractive." To do this, he proposed a five part
program: :

(1) First, he suggested that, barring a major change in the
war, we should stabilize U.S, force levels in Vietnam at about 470,000.
The new figure of 470,000 for U.S. force levels (only 25,000 above the
latest figure of 445,000 for Program #3) apparently was arrived at during
the sessions in Saigon. Before the meetings, Westmoreland had estimated
that Program 3 would entail-a piaster cost of 47.4 billion. The follow-up |
papers to the conference all continued to focus upon the piaster costs of
various troop deployments with the intent to keep them under the 42 billion
lodge ceiling. The most probable explanation of the genesis of the 470,000
figure is that it represented the best guess at the time of the Saigon
meeting of what strength covld be supported within the 42 billion limit
by making very strong efforts to reduce piaster costs per man.

(2) He recommended a barrier near the DMZ and "across the
Crates Of tacos.

(3) He opposed expansion of the ROLLING THUNDER program, recom-
mending instead a "stabilization" to prevent the unsettling escalations
from complicating our political situation (and negotiating posture) and
distracting from the main job of pacification.

(4) He said we should "pursue a vigorous pacification program"
noting that "progress in pacification more than anything else, will
persuade the enemy to negotiate or withdraw.” 51/

(5) Finally, he proferred a three-sided attempt to get negoti-
ations going by (a) shifting the pattern of our bombing (or perhaps even
stopping it); (b) considering strategies designed to enhance the probability
of a split between the VC and Hanoi; and (c) "developing a realistic plan
providing a role for the VC in negotiations, postwar life, and the govern~
ment of the nation.”

TOP SECRET - Sensitive .
92 ‘

‘
