Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

associated with the most desirable of the suggested alter-
natives, Alternative II (Ports Closed). Although the

Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize and appreciate the neces-
sity for continuing review, they believe that the campaign
selected and recommended to you, together with expanded
efforts to increase the destruction and enemy consumption
of war materiels in South Vietnam would have a far-reaching
detrimental effect on the North Vietnamese capability to
support and direct the aggression against South Vietnam. 26/

Secretary McNaughton asked Mr. Martin Bailey to look this JCSM
over to determine if there were any areas of agreement between what
the JCS proposed on the bombing and what ISA at. the time was proposing.
Particularly important was the key point on the unlikelihood of meaning-
ful interdiction. Although the Chiefs did not specifically address this,
they did state that increased bombing as they had recommended in the
earlier JCSM on 20 May would bring about "a deterioration in the enemy's
total environment," leading to curtailment of his overall efforts and
increased difficulty in his support of the war in the South. The
Chiefs had objected to the first alternative that concentrated the bomb-
ing on the southern three route packages because they felt that it would
not appreciably reduce the flow of men and material to the south; that
it would permit the enemy increased freedom of action in the north by
allowing him to increase the density of his air defenses in the pan-
handle or Route Packages 1, 2 and 3, and finally, because they felt that
in the long term such a course of action would not appreciably reduce
U.S. losses. An undesirable side-effect, furthermore,.was that such
cutting back might indicate to the DRV a weakening of the United States
resolve to the detriment of our basic goals and objectives in Vietnam.
Alternative 2 (ports open) was not felt desirable for all of the reasons
cited in the earlier JCSMs and, in addition, because it would not effec-
tively degrade the enemy's war-making capability in any way. The "ports
closed" alternative was desirable, but, in a listing of priorities, the
JCS listed it behind the JCS course of action previously submitted in
JCSM 288-67, 20 May 1967, which proposed a wider, concerted attack against
all logistics facilities -- "the shouldering out" proposal. 2t/

The issues then, as they were distilled and presented by the JCS,
involved first the notion that total pressure was what was reguired to
bring about some degradation of the North Vietnamese ability to support.
the war in the south; that pilot losses would not be appreciably decreased,
and, finally, that shifting the bombing to the southern Route Packages
mould be indicative of U.S, failure in North Vietnam. This JCSM was
carefully examined by McNaughton and his staff and the major arguments
as they were presented by the Joint Chiefs were incorporated in the
revised June léth Draft Presidential Memorandum on the subject of
bombing options. 28/

179 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
