Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

near Dau Tieng, and in March, 1959, ARVN had a number of encounters with
Binh Xuyen elements in the Binh Duong-Bien Hoa area. 56/ There is evi-
dence, though scanty, which indicates that the Binh Xuyen survivors joined
with "communist" groups for their depredations; for example, in the 1958
Michelin attack the combined gengster-communist strength was reported to be
300-400, ARVN General Nguyen Chanh Thi, who fought these particular forces,
has told of capturing a Binh Xuyen soldier who died under torture without
admitting more than that his band had been communicating with communist
forces from Tay Ninh province. The general also described capturing in
March, 1959, in the same operations, flags identical to that raised in
late 1960 by the "National Liberation Front." 57/

In 1956, the Cao Dai Pope, Pham Cong Tac, crossed the frontier of

Tay Ninh into Cambodia with a number of his followers, thence to remain
in opposition to Diem. 58/ Bay Dom, who had been the deputy of the cap-
tured Hoa Hao leader, Ba Cut, also took his forces to the Cambodian bor-
der. In 1956, Diem sent Ba Cut, his hair still uncut, to the guillotine.
Bay Dom and another Hoa Hao leader, Muoi Tri, then took an oath to avenge
Ba Cut, and opened guerrilla warfare against Diem. Some four Hoa Hao bat-
talions are reported to have conducted operations against the GVN continu-

ously through 1962. Muoi Tri in later years openly embraced the Viet Cong
cause.

In brief, while Diem's victory over the sects was impressive, it was
not wholly conclusive, and the very obduracy and determination which won
him early tactical success seemed to impede his inducing the remaining
sect dissidents to perform a constructive role in the nation. Rather,
his policy invited a Viet Cong-sect alliance against him. That some of the
more startling early defeats of Diem's ARVN forces by Viet Cong in 1959 and
1960 occurred in the regions north of Saigon, where lurked Cao Dai and
Binh Xuyen remnants, is more than coincidental.

D. Rural Pacification
1. Strategy

Americans tended to look at Diem’s skein of military and
political successes in 1955 with satisfaction, and to regard thereafter
Vietnam's internal security with growing complacency: But Ngo Dinh Diem
did not. To the contrary, Diem seemed, if anything, over-conscious of
the fact that his test with the Viet Minh lay ahead, and that they posed
a threat more dangerous than the sects could ever have been, not only
because they were politically more pervasive, and not only because they
had taught a generation of Vietnamese peasants the techniques of armed
conspiracy, but also because their tenets offered competing solutions
to the most pressing problems of the Vietnamese people: land and livelihood.
Diem's counter is difficult to fault as a broad concept: ARVN forces would
reclaim for the GVN regions formerly held by the Viet Minh; political indoc-
trination teams moving with the troops would carry the message of Diem's
revolution to the people; and then a broad follow-up program of Civic Action--
political and social development, land reform, and agricultural improvement

21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
