Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. McNamara Acainst Overt Pressures

ee

When he returned from his visit to South Vietnam, Secretary McNemara
recommended. against either the United States or the GVN undertaking overt
actions against North Vietnam "at this time." One compelling reason was
General Khanh's expressed wish not to engage in overt operations until
a firmer GVN political base had been established, but there were others
as well. Mr. McNamara regarded such actions as "extremely delicate...

‘poth from the military and political standpoints," because of specific
problems. These were identified as: (1) the problem of justifying such ac-
tions; (2) the problem of "communist escalation”; and. (3) the problem of
pressures for premature negotiations. Moreover, he stated the judgment

that the practical range of our overt options did not permit assured achieve-
ment of our practical objectives. In identifying these, he drew a distinc-
tion similar to that made by the interagency study group -- between the
stated objective of eliminating Hanoi's control of the VC insurgency and

the "practical" objectives of "collapsing the morale and the self-assurance
of the Viet Cong cadres...and bolstering the morale of the Khanh regime." 30/

What Mr. McNamara did recommend for military actions outside South
Vietnam reflected the contemporary concerns over Laos. Prior to his visit,
the increased NVA activity in eastern Laos had, prompted several recommenda-
tions for military measures to thwart new communist territorial gains in
that country and to interrupt the flow of men and materiel into South Viet-
nam along the Laotian infiltration routes. In particular, elements within
the Department of Defense urged efforts to lift existing restrictions on
eross-border pursuit of engaged forces into Laos, including accompaniment —
of GVN air and ground forces by U.S. advisory personnel. They also sought
authorization for both GVN and U.S. aircraft to overfly Laos for reconnais-
sance purposes. 31/ The JCS urged low-level reconnaissance flights over
Iaos as advantageous both for collecting badly needed. intelligence and
for visibly displaying U.S. power. 32/ The State Department recommended.
deploying twelve F-100's to Thailand, with e view toward its potential
deterrence and signalling impacts on communist activities in Laos. 3
On his return from South Vietnam, two of the actions for which Secretary
McNemara sought Presidential authority dealt with activities affecting
Laos: (1) (Recommendation 11) "hot pursuit" and small-scale operations
across the Lactian border by GVN ground forces "Sor the purpose of border
control" and "continued high-level U.S. overflights" of the border; and
(2) (Recommendation 12) preparations to be ready "to initiate the full
range of Laotian and Cambodian border control actions" within 72 hours. 3h/

Actions recommended by the Secretary to provide measures aimed direct-
ly at North Vietnam (Recommendation 12) fell into two categories: (1)
preparation for "retaliatory actions," defined to include "overt high and/
or low level reconnaissance flights...over North Vietnam" as well as "tit-
for-tat" bombing strikes and commando-type raids; and (2) planning and
preparations "to be in a position on 30 days' notice to initiate the [sicf
progran of ‘Graduated Overt Military Pressure’ against North Vietnam."
The wording of the latter recommendation is notable because, at the time,
there apparently was no planned overt "program" in existence; the discus-
sion of overt pressures appended to the Secretary's report was considerably
less than even a recommendation for such a program: ‘The concept of retali-
atory actions was more explicitly defined, but here too, it was apparent

a

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
