Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

many peoples share our sense of the value of such freedom and independence.
They have taken the risks and made the sacrifices lined to the commitment
to membership in the family of the free world. They have done this in

the belief that we would back up our pledges to help defend them. It

is not right or even expedient -- nor is it in our nature -- to abandon
them when the going is difficult.

"Second, Southeast Asia has great strategic significance in the forward
defense of the United States. Its location across east-west air and sea ‘
lanes flanks the Indian subcontinent on one side and Australia, New Zealand, |
and the Philippines on the other and dominates the gateway between the
Pacific and Indian Oceans. In communist hands this area would pose a most
serious threat to the security of the United States and to the family of
free-world nations to which we belong. To defend Southeast Asia, we must
meet the challenge in South Vietnam.

"And third, South Vietnam is a test case for the new- communist strategy.
Let me examine for a moment the nature of this strategy.

"Just as the Kennedy administration was coming into office in January
1961, Chairman Khrushchev made one of the most important speeches on com-
munist strategy of recent decades. In his report on 4 party conference
entitled 'For New Victories of the World Communist Movement,' Khrushchev ~-
stated: ‘In modern conditions, the following categories of wars should
be distinguished: world wars, local wars, liberation wars and popular
uprising.’ He ruled out what he called ‘world wars' and ‘local wars' as
being too dangerous for profitable indulgence in a world of nuclear wea-
pons. But with regard to what he called 'liberation wars,' he referred
specifically to Vietnam. He said, 'It is a sacred war. We recognize such
wars...'"

* x *

"President Kennedy and President Johnson have recognized, however,
that our forces for the first two types of wars might not be applicable or
effective against what the commumists call 'wars of liberation,’ or what
is properly called covert aggression or insurgency. We have therefore
undertaken and continue to press a variety of programs to develop skilled
specialists, equipment, and techniques to enable us to help our allies
counter the threat of insurgency.

"Communist interest in insurgency techniques did not begin with Khrushchev,
nor for that matter with Stalin. Lenin's works are full of tactical instruc-
tions, which were adapted very successfully by Mao Tse-tung, whose many
writings on guerrilla warfare have become classic references. Indeed,

Mao claims to be the true heir of Lenin's original prescriptions for the
worldwide victory of communism. The North Vietnamese have taken a leaf
or two from Mao's book -- as well as Moscow's -- and added some of their
own.

D-6
