Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to a degree of chaos in May that was in some ways worse than any suffered
in 1964 under Khanh. At the height of the crisis, the U.S. went so far
as to use force and the threat of force against both sides to keep the
confrontation between GVN and the Struggle Movament within bounds. There
was no sign of ill effects from our boldness in this instance.

_ Whatever interest there was in putting pressure on the top levels of
GVN was stronger in Washington than in the Embassy, and stronger in the
Embassy than in MACV,as it had been in the past. But the past failures
of such pressures made everyone gunshy. At one point, Washington felt so
strongly about the high GVN dollar balances that it sent out its own
representative to negotiate with GVN, and he freely threatened to cut down
U.S. dollar aid. However, neither Washington nor the Embassy suggested
doing anything so drastic as holding up aid payments and projects until
a satisfactory agreement could be reached. Confident that the threats
were empty, GVN dug in its heels and gave us nothing but more promises.

Although the U.S. played down pressure or leverage on the top level
of GVN, the idea of leverage at lower levels enjoyed a resurgence. Interest
in the subject reached a low point in June 1965, when we abandoned the
"troike signoff," which had given U.S. province representatives veto control
over the use of AID direct-support commodities. For four months starting
October 1, 1965, MACV experimented with giving its sector advisors a petty
eash fund for urgent projects; however, MACV then dropped the idea. In
April 1966, Lodge urged restoration of these types of leverage, and the idea
kept coming up thereafter. ‘Two major studies, one in Saigon in 1966 and one
in Washington in 1967, came down strongly for regular procedures to use our
material support to put pressure on lower echelons of GVN. They particularly
emphasized signoff systems and the like, including U.S. distribution of MAP
support within Vietnam. But the fear that such methods would prove counter-
productive, either by provoking resistance or by making Vietnamese officials
more dependent on our people and less able to perform on their own, pre-
vented adoption of the proposals.

In at least three instances, AID cut off its support to a province in
order to pressure the province chief. In Septenber 1965, AID accused the
province chief of Binh Tuy of misuse of AID funds, and had to withdraw its
personnel from the province and cut off support to it after threats on their
lives. The incident got into the papers and embarrassed both GVN and the
Embassy; after several weeks GVN moved the accused officer to another job,
and AID resumed its program in the province. In June 1966, AID cut off
shipments to Kontum province for four days to force the province chief to
account for the end uses of AID commodities. In August 1967, CORDS cut
off shipments to Bien Hoa province for eleven weeks for similar reasons.

In contrast, MACV scrupulously avoided withholding MAP support from
military units, regardless of circumstances. The single case of record of

dil TOP SECRET - Sensitive
