Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

He has brought into support of the government representatives
- of key groups previously excluded. He and his colleagues have
developed plans for systematic liberation of areas now sub-
missive to Viet Cong duress and for mobilization of all avail-
able Vietnamese resources in the defense of the homeland.

"At the same time, General. Khanh has understood the need
to improve South Vietnam's relations with its neighbors...
In short, he has demonstrated the energy, comprehension, and
decision reguired by the difficult circumstances that he
faces....

"The third option before the President /after withdrawal
and neutralization, both rejected/ was initiation of military
actions outside South Vietnam, particularly against North
Vietnam, in order to supplement the counterinsurgency program
in South Vietnam.

"This course of action -- its implications and ways of
carrying it out -- has been carefully studied.

"What ever ultimate course of action may be forced upon
us by the other side, it is clear that actions under this option
would be only a supplement to, not a substitute for, progress
within South Vietnam's own borders.

. J "the fourth course of action wes to concentrate on help-
ing the South Vietnamese win the battle in their own country.
This, all agree, is essential no matter what else is done....

"We have reaffirmed U.S. support for South Vietnam's
Government and pledged economic assistance and military train-
ing and logistical support for as long as it takes to bring
the insurgency under control.

"We will support the Government of South Vietnam in
carrying out its Anti-Insurgency Plan...." 52/

The next day McNamara formally ended the hope of phased withdrawal,
by stopping the lower-echelon joint planning activities that had aimed at
replacing U.S. elements in Vietnam by Vietnamese. Although the Vietnamese
knew that the "withdrawal" of 1000 men in December 1963 had been a pretense,
his action now remoyed any remaining doubt about our intentions. The message
wes brief: :

"Model Plan projection for phasedown of U.S. forces

and GVN forces is superseded. Policy is as announced by
White House on 17 March 64." 53/

16 TOP SECREP - Sensitive

