Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. The Question Again -- Hscalate or Negotiate?
1. Two Courses - Escalate or Level Off

As already discussed, the JCS had transmitted to the
Secretary of Defense on April 20 their endorsement of General Westmore-
land's March troop requests (100,000 immediately and 200,000 eventually).
In so doing the military had once again confronted the Johnson Adminis-
tration with a difficult decision on whether to escalate or level-off
the U.S. effort. What they proposed was the mobilization of the Reserves,
a major new troop commitment in the South, an extension of the war into
the VC/NVA sanctuaries (laos, Cambodia, and possibly North Vietnam),
the mining of North Vietnamese ports and a solid commitment in manpower
and resources to a military victory. 61/ The recommendation not unsur-
prisingly touched off a searching reappriasal of the course of U.S.
strategy in the war.

Under Secretary Katzenbach opened the review on May 2 in
a memo to John McNaughton in which he outlined the problem and assigned
the preparation of various policy papers to Defense, CIA, State and
the White House. As Katzenbach saw it,

Fundamentally, there are three jobs which have to be done:

1. Assess the current situation in Viet-Nam and the
various political and military actions which could be taken
to bring this to a successful conclusion;

2. Review the possibilities for negotiation, including
an assessment of the ultimate U.S. position in relationship
to the DRV and NLF; and

3. Assess the military and political effects of intens-
ification of the war in South Vietnam and in North Viet-Nem. 62/

Katzenbach's memo asked Defense to consider two alternative courses of
action: course A, the kind of escalation the military proposed including
the 200,000 new troops; and course B, the leveling-off of the U.S, troop
commitment with an addition of no more than 10,000 new men. Bombing
strategies in the North to correlate with each course were also to be
considered. Significantly, a territorially limited bombing halt was
suggested as 4& possibility for the first time.

Consider with Course B, for example, a cessation, after
the current targets have been struck, of bombing North Viet-
namese areas north of 20° (or, if it looked sufficiently
important to maximize an attractive settlement opportunity,
cessation of bombing in all of North Viet-Nam.) 63/

ek TOP SECRET - Sensitive
