Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive:

These conclusions were supported copiously in a separate
volume of the study devoted specifically to such analysis. The second
objective of the bombing, to raise South Vietnamese morale, had been
substantially achieved. There had been an appreciable improvement in
South Vietnamese morale immediately after the bombing began and sub-
sequent buoyancy always accompanied major new escalations of the air
war. But the effect was always transient, fading as a particular pat-
tern of attack became a part of the routine of the war. There was no
indication that bombing could ever constitute a permanent support for
South Vietnamese morale if the situation in the South itself was adverse.

The third function of the bombing, as described by McNamara,
was psychological -- to win the test of wills with Hanoi by showing U.S.
determination and intimidating DRV leaders about the future. The failure
of the bombing in this area, according to the JASON study, had been as
signal as in purely military terms.

The bombing campaign against NVN has not discernably
weakened the determination of the North Vietnamese leaders

to continue to direct and support the insurgency in the
South. Shortages of food and clothing, travel restrictions,
separations of families, lack of adequate medical and educa-
tional facilities, and heavy work loads haye tended to
affect adversely civilian morale. However, there are few

if any reliable reports on a breakdown of the commitment of
the people to support the war. Unlike the situation in the
South, there are no reports of marked increases of absenteeism,
draft dodging, black market operations or prostitution.
There is no evidence that possible war weariness among the
people has shaken the leadership's belief that they can
continue to endure the bombing and outlast the U.S. and

SVN in a protracted war of attrition.

Long term plans for the economic development have not
been abandoned but only set aside for the duration of the
war. ‘The regime continues to send thousands of young men
and women abroad for higher education and technical training;
we consider this evidence of the regime's confidence of the
eventual outcome of the war.

The expectation that bombing would erode the deter-
mination of Hanoi and its people clearly overestimated the
persuasive and disruptive effects of the bombing and, corres-
pondingly, underestimated the tenacity and recuperative
capabilities of the North Vietnamese. That the bombing
has not achieved anticipated goals reflects a general failure
+0 appreciate the fact, well-documented in the historical

126 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
