Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

both military and civilian morale which may result in a greater
national effort and, hopefully, reverse the downward trend.

"March, 1965: Events in March were encouraging...RVNAF ground
operations were highlighted by renewed operational effort...VC
activity was considerably below the norm of the preceding six

' months and indications were that the enemy was engaged in the
re-supply and re-positioning of units possibly in preparation
for a new offensive, probably in the II Corps area...In summary,
March has given rise to some cautious optimism. The current
government appears to be taking control of the situation and,

if the present state of popular morale can be sustained and
strengthened, the GVN, with continued U.S. support, should be
able to counter future VC offenses successfully.

"April, 1965: Friendly forces retained the initiative during
April and a review of events reinforces the feeling of optimism
generated last month...In summary, current trends are highly
encouraging and the GVN may have actually turned the tide at
long last. However, there are some disquieting factors which
indicate a need to avoid overconfidence. A test of these
trends should be forthcoming in the next few months if the

VC launch their expected counter-offensive and the period may
well be one of the most important of the war.

"May, 1965: The encouraging trends of the past few months did
not carry through into May and there were some serious setbacks.
However, it is hoped that the high morale and improved disci-
pline and leadership which has developed during that period will
sustain future GVN efforts...

"June, 1965: During June the military situation in the RVN con-
tinued to worsen despite a few bright spots occasioned by RVNAF
successes. In general, however, the VC...retained the initiative
having launched several well-coordinated, savage attacks in
regimental strength...

"July, 1965: An overall analysis of the military situation at
the end of July reveals that GVN forces continued to make pro-
gress in IV Corps, maintained a limited edge in I Corps with the
increased USMC effort and suffered 4 general regression in the
northern portion of III Corps as well as in the central highlands
of II Corps.. The VC monsoon offensive, which was so effective in
June, faltered during July as VC casualty figures reached a new
high...

"Aucust, 1965: An evaluation of the overall military effort in
-Ausust reveals several encouraging facts. The most pronounced
is the steady increase in the number of VC casualties and the

35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
