Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

conversely hurt Huong's position. In addition, following
steps aimed more specifically at military have occurred to 3
us:

1. Suspend operation Barrel Roll -- not certain it
would affect generals -- might have wrong impact on Hanoi --
obviously generals couldn't be told because that would imply
commitment to resume if they behave.

2. instruct all or selected Corps or division advisors
make known our dissatisfaction, perhaps suspending for time
being further contacts with counterparts.

3. Stand down FARMGATE.

4, Suspend logistical airlift where critical supply
shortages do not exist.

"On balance, we inclined believe none except possibly
Ist and 2nd steps would produce desired results. Obviously
any would hamper over-all war effort, especially if continued
for very long.

"We have also considered and rejected possibility of
eutting essentials POL and direct military supplies. Simi-
larly we do not favor suspension or interruption CIP, since
it would primarily affect civilian confidence in Huong govern-
ment." 61/

Although Khanh talked to Taylor about travel arrangements for
himself and several other generals on the 22nd, the Young Turks had their
backs up (or were convinced they could do what they pleased), and a11 stood
fast. Khanh having rallied the military behind him, attacked Taylor for
his undiplomatic actions. He spoke to the nation attacking communism and
colonialism, the latter an inference to the domineering position of Taylor.
In a message to the President on the 22nd, Taylor commented:

"Generals acting greatly offended by my disapproval
of their recent actions privately expressed to four of their
munber and resent our efforts to strengthen Huong govern-
ment against their pressures. One unfortunate effect has
been to drive them closer to Khanh who has sensed the
opportunity to solidify his position." 62/

‘He feared Khanh would air the quarrel publicly. Rusk cabled support:

"T wish to compliment you on the vigor with which you
have pursued this issue of uaity since your return from
Washington." 63/

59: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
