Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Now, you mentioned the question of it would be foolish for
them keeping large forces there for a long time.

"T believe, as ¢ soldier, that was not @ good thing to do, to
have all these troops there. But, remember, we have differences
with our allies all over the world. They are family differences, and
sometimes they are actite; but, by end large, the reason we call it
'free world' is because each nation in it wants to remain independent
under its own government and not under some dictatorial form of govern~
ment. So, to the basic ideals, all of us must subscribe.

"Q. Peter Lisagor, Chicago Daily News: In the light of Mr.
Spaek's statement, can you tell us what your view is of why so many
of our allies fail to see this point you have just made?

"DHE PRESIDENT. Well, it's a very difficult thing, and of
course an answer is speculative. But when we go back to the Man-
churian incident of 1931, when we go back to Hitler's marching into
the Rhineland, when we take his taking over the Sudetenland and the
Anschluss with Austria by force, when finally he took over all of
Czechoslovakia, where was the point to stop this thing before it got
into a great major war?

“Why did not public opinion see this thing happening?

"Now, in hindsight, most of us have condemned these failures very
bitterly, going right back to 1931 in Manchuria. I don't know why the
Inman is s0 constructed that he believes that possibly there is an
easier solution--that you can by feeding aggression a little bit, a
teaspoonful of something, that he won't see that they are going to
demand the whole quart. <i =

"J don't know any real answer to that thing; it is puzzling.

And, of course, for those who have to carry responsibility, it is a
very heavy weight on their spirits and minds; there is no question ebout
that. But there it is."

ae) ae

2h. Special Message to the Congress on the Mutual Security Program,
March 13, 1959, Public Papers of the Presidents--Eisenhower, 1959,
Ds 256. ' =

* %
* "T believe that these events of the past year and the stern, in-

deed harsh, realities of the‘world of today and the years ahead demon-
strate the importance of the Mutusl Security Program to the security

B-13
