Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

form it took, although whether it was shown to the President is not
clear. McNaughton's draft rejected the more fulsome expressions of
the U.S. objective advanced by the Chiefs and Bundy in favor of fol-
lowing @ more closely defined set of goals:

The limited over-all US objective, in terms of the
narrow US commitment and not of wider US preferences, is
to take action (so long as they continue to help themselves)
to see that the people of South Vietnam are permitted to
determine their own future. Our commitment is to stop (or
generously to offset when we cannot stop) North Vietnamese
military intervention in the South, so that "the board will
not be tilted" against Saigon in an internal South Vietnamese
contest for control...The sub-objectives, at which our bombing
campaign in the North has always been aimed, are these:

--(1) To retaliate and to lift the morale of the people
in the South, including Americans, who are being attacked by
agents of the North;

--(2) To add to the pressure on Hanoi to end the war;

--(3) To reduce the flow and/or to increase the cost
of infiltrating men and materiel from North to South. 160/

In light of these objectives, three alternative air war programs were
examined in the memo. They were:

ALTERNATIVE A. Intensified attack on the Hanoi-Haiphong
logistical base. Under this Alternative, we would continue
attacks on enemy installations and industry and would conduct
an intensified, concurrent and sustained effort against all
elements of land, sea and air lines of communication in North
Vietnam -- especially those entering and departing the Hanoi-
Haiphong areas. Foreign shipping would be "shouldered out"
of Haiphong by a series of air attacks that close in on the
center of the port complex. The harbor and approaches would
be mined, forcing foreign shipping out into the nearby
estuaries for offloading by lighterage. Intensive and
systematic armed reconnaissance would be carried out against
the roads and railroads from China (especially the northeast
railroad), against coastal shipping and coastal transship-
ment locations, and against all other lend lines of com-
mnications. The eight major operational airfields would be
systematically attacked, and the deep-water ports of Cam Pha
and Hon Gai would be struck or mined as required. ALTERINA-
TIVE A could be pursued full-force between now and September
(thereafter the onset of unfavorable weather conditions would
seriously impair operations).

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
