Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

On the night of March 29-30 the Binh Xuyen struck back.
Mortar shells fell on the palace grounds and Binh Xuyen troops tried to
regain the prefecture. They were repulsed by National Army troops. The
VNA then moved to attack the Surete itself in retaliatim but French
officers apparently cut off their gas and ammmition supplies temporarily
to keep the National Army on the defensive. Fighting ended by 3:30 in
the morning of March 30. 107/ ]

'General Ely opposed a VNA offensive against the Surete
headquarters, not because it might fail but because it was irrelevant.
Relevant was Diem's inability to defeat the sects rapidly and decisively
throughout the country. If force were used to prove a minor point, a
long, bloody and major civil war would surely ensue. Ely was outraged at
Diem's attitude. He felt the premier verged on megalomania and was ready
to "put the city to sword and flame to establish his authority.” 108/
Collins sympathized with Ely, but also felt if Diem did not prove he could
control Saigon he would be forced to accede to sect demands. 109/

4, Truce - But No Calm

On March 31, a 48-hour cease-fire was won by General Jean
Ganbiez, trusted by both the National Army and the Binh Xuyen. The truce
was extended into April but failed to cool tempers or ease tensions. (Cao Dai
forces which had broken with the United Front were integrated into the
National Army on March 31, however -- one happy note for Diem.)

ae Lansdale's yersion

Lansdale, whose account of this and later developments is
not at all flattering to the French, says Ely decided to impose a cease-fire
and won Collins' concurrence. French officers then moved in and stopped the
fighting. Lansdale “saw Ambassador Collins...explaining that only the Binh
Xuyen would gain by the cease-fire.” But it continued:

Anpeeeaior Collins was sincerely convinced that the Binh Xuyen
could be induced by French negotiations to withdraw from the
Sureté and police control of the metropolis.... 110/

Lansdale reports the French had long been working against Diem through the
Vietnamese National Army (they used its G-6 as an arm of French intelligence)
and that French soldiers under his command in the National Security Divi-
sion of TRIM tried to sabotage the Diem regime and US programs designed to
strengthen it.

The French had daily fed us the latest French propaganda line
(Diem was weak, Diem was bloodthirsty, the VNA had low morale
esewas unable to fight, Americans didn't understand the Viet-
namese, all whites must encourage only selected Vietnamese
loyal to the French because the remainder would turn against

‘ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
28
