19.

20.
el,

22.

23.

eh,
25.
26.

Heal OF

28.
29.

30.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CINCPAC to JCS, Exclusive for General Wheeler and General West-
moreland from Admiral Sharp, Subj: "Memo from General Beach
Reference USARPAC Views Relative to Probable Enemy Actions," dated

3 January 1967. This message refers to a verbal request from PACOM
for such views of major commanders and is a follow-up to a 24 Decem-
ber 1966 memorandum by General Beach devoted to the same subject.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid. Emphasis added.

Ibid. The author never explained what he thought were "more important
operations," but one can gather from the preceding paragraphs that

he meant ground operations in the base areas and against main force
units.

USMACV "Monthly Evaluation" January 1967, p. 3.
Tbid.
Ibid.

ibid. There were 136,591 small unit operations reported with 1 2065
enemy contacts, 235 of these at night.

Ibid.

Ibid. The problem of operational control of RD battalions is one of
many "little" problems that complicated the greater problem of
COMUSMACV in allocating personnel between "shield" and "shelter" and
optimizing his strategic gains. In January, the Joint General Staff,
RVNAF, published a directive stating that ARVN units employed in sup-
port of RD may operate under the operational control of either divi-
sion or sector as appropriate. The authority that exercised control
would designate a tactical area of responsibility (TAOR) to be approved
by the Corps Commander concerned. Units would not be withdrawn from
their assigned TAOR by division or sector without prior approval of
Corps. However, in an emergency (e.g., when the unit was needed to
assist a friendly force that came under attack suddenly), the unit
might be used outside the TAOR for a period not to exceed six hours,
provided other local military resources were already committed, and
a minimum security force remained in the TAOR while the unit was
away. See Ibid., p. 12-13.

THEA S: De ek

sly TOP SECRET - Sensitive
