Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is pretty clear, then, that the President intended, after the early
April NSC meetings, to cautiously and carefully experiment with U.S.
forces in offensive roles. There was sober awareness that the North
Vietnamese were not going to quit and that the U.S. was well on its
way to being cormitted on the ground. The Rolling Thunder program,

if it was going to bear any fruit at all, certainly was not going to
do so in the next few months. ’

The U.S. decision-makers really were on what Assistant Secre-
tary of Defense McNaughton described as "the horns of a trilemma."
While addressing General Johnson's proposals for action in South Vietnam,
McNaughton jotted down some notes on 24 March which accurately described
the predicament facing the U.S. Government. The question, according to
McNaughton, was: "Can the situation inside South Vietnam be bottomed out
(a) without extreme measures against the DRV and (b) without deployment
of large numbers of U.S. (and 3rd Country) combat troops inside SVN?”
McNaughton's answer was "perhaps, but probably m." Because that was
the case, he went on, the U.S. was faced with the "trilemma.” Policy
appeared to be drifting even though there was consensus that present
action probably would not prevent collapse of the GVN. All three choices
for remedial action so far presented had been rejected. These choices
were (1) will-breaking strikes against the DRV which risked escalation
flash and were thus too risky, (2) large U.S. troop input which raised
the old spectre of an Asian land war and recalled memories of the French
defeat, and (3) exit from the scene through negotiation which insured,
because of the current situation, humiliation of the U.S. 47/ The
alternatives, as described above by Mr. McNaughton, went into the
National Security Council discussions which took place during the Am-
bassador's visit. What came out of those discussions was NSAM 328 and
the decision to proceed ahead very slowly with ground force involvement.

Missing from NSAM 328 was the elucidation of a unified, coherent
strategy. Ambassador Taylor, among others, had raised the question as to
whether or not Western troops could fight effectively in Vietnam. No one
could forget the French failure, and the Ambassador's reservations re-
ceived due attention. Before devising a strategy for the use of U.S.
ground forces, however, it was deemed necessary to experiment with small
numbers of them to see how they would do. There was time to indulge the
luxury of a leisurely build-up. The situation was bad, but currently the
GVN was doing a bit better, and nothing pointed to immediate collapse.

The early April NSC meetings signalled the beginning of an
enclave strategy. U.S. forces would operate within strictly limited
boundaries (originally not to exceed 50 miles from base) and would have
their backs to the sea. No Dien Bien Phu's would be presented for the
enemy to exploit as supplies and reinforcements could be brought in with
ease over sea LOC's controlled entirely by the U.S. Navy. As a corollary,
the U.S. forces could be withdrawn with equal ease should the situation
so dictate.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
