Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

infiltration routes in the neck of North Vietnam, between
17° and 20°. 103/

For the purposes of this paper, it is not necessary to
develop the entire DPM argumentation of the pros and cons of the respec-
tive courses of action. It will suffice to include the sections dealing
with the air war elements of the two options. (It should be noted,
however, that the air and ground programs were treated as an integrated
package in each option.) This then was the way the DPM developed the
analysis of the war segment of course of action A:

Bombing Purposes and Payoffs

Our bombing of North Vietnam was designed to serve
three purposes:

--(1) To retaliate and to lift the morale of the people
in the South who were being attacked by agents of the North.

--(2) To add to the pressure on Hanoi to end the war.

--(3) To reduce the flow and/or to increase the cost
of infiltrating men and materiel from North to South.

We cannot ignore that a limitation on bombing will
cause serious psychological problems among the men,
officers and commanders, who will not be able to under-
stand why we should withhold punishment from the enemy.
General Westmoreland said that he is "frankly dismayed
at even the thought of stopping the bombing program."
But this reason for attacking North Vietnam must be
serutinized carefully. We should not bomb for punitive
reasons if it serves no other purpose -- especially if
analysis shows that the actions may be counterproductive.
Tt costs American lives; it creates a backfire of
revulsion and opposition by killing civilians; it creates
serious risks; it may harden the enemy. ,

With respect to added pressure on the North, it is
becoming apparent that Hanoi may already have "written
off" all assets and lives that might be destroyed by
US military actions short of occupation of annihilation.
They can and will hold out at least so long as a prospect
of winning the "war of attrition" in the South exists.
And our best judgment is that a Hanoi prerequisite to
negotiations is significant retrenchment (if not complete

ks * TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
