Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Finally, he quarrelled with the way in which the paper had dealt
with the definition of "success." He felt that this definition was
the major problem, that the draft had not properly grappled with the
redefinition, since "winning" was what the strategy pursued by COMUS-
MACV tried to do. He suggested that as a matter of tactics maybe
the President should figure it out himself, a point which tied in
closely with an earlier one of his about getting the "philosophy of
the war" straightened out and thereby avoiding another diplomatic
default and military misuse of forces. 4

McNaughton's review of the situation in South and North Vietnam
stressed that the big war in the south between the United States and
the North Vietnamese units seemed to be going well but that regretably
the "other war" against the VC was not going so well. In his words:

The "big war" in the South between the US and the North
Vietnamese military units (NVA) is going well. We staved
off military defeat in 1965; we gained the military initi-
ative in 1966; snd since then we have been hurting the
enemy badly, spoiling some of his ability to strike. "In
the final analysis," General Westmoreland said, "we are
fighting a war of attrition." In that connection, the
enemy has been losing between 1500 and 2000 killed-in-action
@ week, while we and the South Vietnamese have been losing
175 and 250 respectively. The VC/NVA 287,000-man order of
battle is leveling off, and General Westmoreland believes
that, as of March, we "reached the cross-over point" -- we
began attriting more men than Hanoi can recruit or infil-
trate each month. The concentration of NVA forces across
the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) and the enemy use of long-range
artillery are matters of concern. There are now four NVA
divisions in the DMZ area. The men infiltrate directly
across the western part of the plans to nibble at our forces,
seeking to inflict heavy casualties, perhaps to stage a
"spectacular" (perhaps against Quang Tri City or Hue), and/
or to try a major thrust into the Western Highlands. They
are forcing us to transfer some forces from elsewhere in
Vietnam to the I Corps area.

Throughout South Vietnam, supplies continue to flow
in ample quantities, with Cambodia becoming more and more
important as a supply base -- now of food and medicines,
perhaps ammunition later. The enemy retains the ability
to initiate both large- and small-scale attacks. Small-
scale attacks in the first quarter of 1967 are running at
double the 1966 average; larger-scale attacks are again on
the inerease after falling off substantially in 1966. Acts
of terrorism and harassment have continued at about the
same rate. 3

148 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
