on

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Until a command structure, even if only in skeleton form,
for SEATO forces has been evolved, SEATO is not in a position,
collectively, to operate instantaneously....A study on command
structure should be started now.” 5h/

At the following meeting, in September 1959, a SEATO command was estab-
lished in embryo when the U.S. agreed to the reorganization of the
Military Planning Office into a configuration that could be assimilated
by the planning staff of a permanent SEATO headquarters along the lines
of SHAPE. 55/* By the twelfth SEATO Military Advisers Conference in
Washington in May 1960, Secretary of Defense Gates was able to make

the public announcement that SEATO had advanced significantly in organ-
ization and planning:

"National forces of the Southeast Asia countries, backed
by powerful mobile forces, contribute to the deterrent....
Coordinated SEATO military plans have been prepared and are
capable of rapid execution to parry any likely Communist threat....
SEATO exercises have progressed from simple observer type to...
sophisticated maneuvers...." 56 :

ec. SEATO Contingency Planning

During the winter of 1959-1960 a series of plans was pre-
pared for contingencies throughout the SEATO area. By the spring of
1961 these SEATO plans, numbered 1 through 6, came under consideration
in the first "invoking" of the SEATO Treaty, when the Pathet Lao forces
threatened to overrun Laos and invade Thailand. 57/ From the U,5.
point of view, the SEATO plans were derivatives of U.S. unilateral plans
for Southeast Asia covering "action up to and including action with
Communist China." The then current U.S. master plan, PACOM Operations
Plan 32-59, served as the basis for U.S. contributions to the SRATO
Plans. 58/

The U.S. led the way in preparation of a series of six
contingency plans for the treaty area. By the fall of 1961 some of
these plans had been approved and others were under discussion at
Bangkok. 59/ Of these plans, at least three were concerned with the
SEATO Protocol states of Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam. Plan #4 provided
for the defense of Southeast Asia, including Pakistan, against attack
by forces of Communist China and the DRV. The general concept was:

(1) - "fo launch air and naval attacks; local forces to
delay the enemy's advance as feasible while rapidly reinforcing.
with external SEATO forces."

(2) "To establish ground defenses in order to hold the
enemy forward of vital areas in South Vietnam, Thailand and
East Pakistan, and to build up forces behind them while con-
ducting air and naval offensive against enemy forces, base
areas, LOC's and war-making capacity."

*See Appendix B for present organization.
A-27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
