Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

put Taylor backed off from the sanctions idea. Possibly still hoping
that Khanh would go, he sald there was no need for action but that the
option should be kept open. In particular, he saw no value in suspend-
ing the bombing of Laos. 64/

Also on the 22nd, while talking to Taylor of leaving, Khanh met
with the Young Turks and agreed to break openly with Taylor by seeking
his recall. State continued to back a tough line with them, and rejected
Taylor's suggestion of a diversion in the form of a reprisal bombing on
North Vietnam for the Brinks BOQ bombing early in the week.

"Hanoi would hardly read into it any strong or continu-
ing signal in view overall confusion in Saigon...There might
be suspicion, at least internationally, that BOQ bombing
was not in fact done by vc,"

Taylor urged Huong to insist on restoration of the HNC and declare the
generals insubordinate if they refused. Khanh and the generals attacked
Taylor publicly on December 23, as Taylor had feared, charging him with

inswiting them and abusing his power. Then on December 2h, Taylor responded

in kind, telling the press his version of the December 20 confrontation,
and suggesting that Khanh had outstayed his usefulness.

Khanh then threatened privately to declare Taylor persona non grata;
the Embassy replied that asking Taylor to leave was equivalent to asking
the U.S. to leave. The implied threat of U.S. withdrawal was enough to
stop the Khanh move, if he was ever serious about it. ‘Taylor then suggested
that Alex Johnson and the generals should form an ad hoe joint arbitration
committee to resolve the differences between Khanh and Taylor. The idea
was evidently novel. enought to distract Khanh and the generals or to satis-
fy their dignity; it disconnected the buttons that had been pushed when
Khanh and Taylor each said he wanted the other to leave the country.
The ad hoc committee never met, but the proposal generated calm discussion
between the Embassy and the generals for several days and allowed them to
cool off gracefully. 65/

However, the basic issue of the future of the HNC and of civilian
goverment remained unresolved. Huong consulted with Taylor continuously,
and followed some of his advice, but stopped short of taking the strong
public stance he urged. On December 31, Taylor said to Washington that
the USG might have to accept a military government in Saigon, though he
said that Khanh mist not head it. He said that plans for "Phase IL" (bomb-
ing the North) should teke into account various possibilities within GVN. 66/
Although Taylor had earlier favored the military's return to power, he
objected to the means and to the timing of their present action.

10. Ongoing Programs, Second Half 1964

While the political crises of Ambassador Taylor's first six
months in Saigon built wp to comic opera proportions, MACV and the country
team struggled valiantly to conduct business as usual.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
