Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

RVNAF'S ROLE IN PACTFICATION

It has already been noted that the U.S. gradually came to espouse
a division of effort between U.S. forces and RVNAF in which the former
would concentrate on defeating the main forces of the insurgents in the
unpopulated areas while RVNAF concentrated on securing pacification
operations in the populated areas.

General Westmoreland first informed Washington of his intention to
follow this general division of effort in late August 1966. But his
emphasis was one of degree, he made clear, rather than of mutually
exclusive categories:

-- Our strategy will be one of a general offensive with
maximum practical support to area and population security in
further support of Revolutionary Development.

The essential tasks of Revolutionary Development and
nation building cannot be accomplished if enemy main forces
can gain access to the population centers and destroy our
efforts. US, Free World Forces, with their mobility and in
coordination with RVNAF, must take the fight to the enemy by
attacking his main forces and invading his base areas. Our
ability to do this is improving steadily. Maximum emphasis
will be given to the use of long range patrols and other means
to find the enemy and locate his bases. Forces and bases thus
discovered will be subjected to either ground attack or quick
reaction B-52 and tactical air strikes. When feasible B-52
strikes will be followed by ground forces to search the area.
Sustained ground combat operations will maintain pressure on
the enemy.

The growing strength of US/Free World forces will
provide the shield that will permit ARVN to shift its weight
of effort to an extent not heretofore feasible to direct sup-
port of Revolutionary Development. Also, I visualize that a
significant number of the US/Free World maneuver battalions
will be committed to tactical areas of responsibility (TAOR)
missions. These missions encompass base security and at the
same time support Revolutionary Development by spreading
security radially from the bases to protect more of the popu-
lation. Saturation patrolling, civie action, and close associ-
ation with ARVN, regional and popular forces to bolster their
combat effectiveness are among the tasks of the ground force
elements. At the same time ARVN troops will be available if
required to reinforce offensive operations and to serve as
reaction forces for outlying security posts and government
centers under attack. Our strategy will include opening,
constructing and using roads, as well as a start toward opening

82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
