Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ANNEX WO, 2

MILITARY SITUATION IN INDOCHINA

1. View of the Joint Chiefs of Steff. In a memorandum of
7 September to the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
stated the following:

"Prior to 1 January 1951, the currently planned level of
United States military aid to the French end native allied
forces of Indochina should increase their military capa-
bilities but not to the extent of counterbalancing Viet
Minh capabilities, In view of these considerations, the
Joint Chiefs-of Staff suggest that the proposed United
States position take cognizance that the situation in
Indochina is to be viewed with alarm and that urgent and
drastic action is required by the French if they are to
avoid military defeat in Indochina. ‘Such a setback would
not only be detrimental to the prestige of the French and
the United Stetes but it could also jeopardise the United
States military position in Asia,"

2, Conclusions of Joint MDAP Surve Mission, After observing
conditions in north and south Indochine, General Erskine, Chief of
the Military Group of the Joint MDAP Survey Mission in Southeast
Asia, reported the following conclusions on 5 August 1950:

"(a) Military assistance will have to be provided to the
French in Indo-China on a considerable scale if the
broad objective of assisting in resisting the
encroachment of Communism in Southeast Asia is to be
successfully achieved, The assistance which has been
requested, up to this time, is considered inadequate
to fully consummate the U.S. broad objective. Additional
material and equipment will require additional personnel.

"(b) The French forces in Indo-China, after approximately
five years of warefare, are ttalemated. Casualties in
this type of warfare have been very high.

"(e) The French Command and troops, after a very brief study
and observations, appear to have lost a considerable
amount of offensive spirit and have been frustrated
in their efforts to restore internal. security.

COPY 358
. 722 TS pad rp rae
