Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive

It

THE BUDDHIST CRISIS: MAY 8 - AUGUST 21

1. ‘The Crisis Erupts

The incident in Hue on May 8, 1963, that precipitated what came
to be called the Buddhist crisis, and that started the chain of events
that ultimately led to the overthrow of the Diem regime and the murder
of the Ngo brothers, happened both inadvertently and unexpectedly.
No one then foresaw that it would generate a national opposition move-
ment capable of rallying virtually all non-commmist dissidence in
South Vietnam. More importantly, no one then appreciated the degree
of alienation of Vietnam's people from their government, nor the extent
of the political decay within the regime, a regime no longer capable of
coping with popular discontent.

The religious origins of the incident are traceable to the massive
Plight of Catholic refugees from North Vietnam after the French defeat
in 1954. An estimated one million Catholics fled the North and resettled
in the South. 1/ Diem, animated, no doubt, by religious as well as
humanitarian sympathy, and with an eye to recruiting political support
from his coreligionists, accorded these Catholic refugees preferential
treatment in land redistribution, relief and assistance, commercial
and export-import licenses, government employment, and other GVN largess.
Because Diem could rely on their loyalty, they came to fill almost all
important civilian and military positions. As an institution, the
Catholic Church enjoyed a special legal status. The Catholic primate,
Ngo Dinh Thuc, was Diem's brother and advisor. But prior to 1962, there
had been no outright discrimination against Buddhists. However, among
South Vietnam's 3-4 million practicing Buddhists and the 80% of the
population who were nominal Buddhists, the regime's favoritism,
authoritarianism, and discrimination created a smoldering resentment.

In April 1963, the government ordered provincial officials to
enforce a longstanding but generally ignored ban on the public display
of religious flags. The order came just after the officially encouraged
celebrations in Hue commemorating the 25th anniversary of the ordination
of Ngo Dinh Thuc, the Archbishop of Hue, during which Papal flags had
been prominently flown. The order also came, as it happened, just prior
to Buddha's birthday (May 8) -- a major Buddhist festival. Hue, an old
provincial capital of Vietnam, was the only real center of Buddhist
learning and scholarship in Vietnam and its university had long been a
center of left-wing dissidence. Not surprisingly, then, the Buddhists in
Hue defiantly flew their flags in spite of the order and, when the local
administration appeared to have backed down on the ban, were emboldened
to hold a previously scheduled mass meeting on May 8 to commemorate
Buddha's birthday. Seeing the demonstration as a challenge to family
prestige (Hue was also the capital of the political fief of another Diem

h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
