a.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the "technical-tactical competence" expectation.) Secretary McNamara
-~ probably wishing also to form prudent contingency plans and to have
the capability to exert pressure on the Diem regime -- directed that
the U.S. plan for a phased withdrawal of U.S. forces over a three year
period. 85/ This decision and the subsequent plans for its implementa-
tion, chronicled in another volume of this series,* indicates the extent
to which optimistic expectations existed at some high official U.S.
levels even while (4s we were later to learn) the situation in the
countryside continued to deteriorate. This, in turn, helps to explain
why the advisory build-up completed in April 1962 was not folllowed by
any additional increases in advisors for more than two years.

The central problem in this regard was that the U.S. had neither
a firm grasp on reliable indicators to determine how the war was pro-
gressing nor a willingness to accept claims that it was not going well.
The second of these tendencies was attributable to the approach which
finally emerged from the decisions following the Taylor mission: The
U.S. would support Diem unstintingly and expect, in return, meaningful
reforms and improvements within GVN. But it was caught in a dilemmas
when the expected reforms did not take place. To continue to support
Diem without reforms meant quite simply that he, not we, would determine
the course of the counterinsurgent effort and thet the steps he took to
assure his continuance in power would continue to take priority over a11
else. To deny him support in any of a variety of ways would erode his
power without a viable alternative in sight. The tendency may not have
been precisely to "sink or swim with Ngo Dinh Diem," as Homer Bigart
phrased it, but it came very close to this.

The inebility to know just how things were going presented an even
more difficult problem. The tendency was to use forces retrained or
newly equipped, strategic hamlets constructed, and trends in VC activity,
@s indicators of the progress of the war. But training does not neces-
sarily equal effectiveness, the number of hamlets constructed does not
tell one of the loyalty of their populations, and enemy attacks might be
a misleading guide. Were GVN making progress in a contested area, for
instance, Viet Cong reactions might be expected to increase rather than
to diminish in frequency and intensity. Conversely, the insurgents would
have no good reason to attack populated areas which they had already
succeeded in penetrating and over which they had established effective
de facto control. 86/ Data and observations could be variously inter-
preted -- so variously, in fact, that President Kennedy was led to ask
two observers just returned from Vietnam who gave him divergent reports,
"You two did visit the same country, didn't you?" 87/

¥ Volume IV.B.4., Evolution of the War: Phased Withdrawal of U.S. Forces
1962-196) (TS). i

35 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
