ee ee eee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

General Westmoreland, in his deployment planning, is pro-

ceeding on the important assumption that on ee nee any proposed
deployments must increase his overall combat effectiveness; that is,
before he deploys a combat unit he must be sure that he has adequate

support for it, This does not mean, however, that he will deploy a
unit only when he can get 100 percent combat effectiveness for the unit.

Both General Westmoreland and Admiral Sharp put to McNamara
the critical question: In our future planning, which of the three cases
shall we assume will be followed? McNamara told them that it was simply
not possible yet to decide, but for the present, they should plan on combat
unit deployments equal to those in Case 1, (In this regard, it should be
noted that the combat unit deployments under Case 1 and Case 3 do not
differ significantly for the first 6 months of 1966, although the logistics
deployments do differ for that period.) Likewise the Department of
Defense is to:

(1) Assume and act to deploy combat vnits as provided
under Case 1, but without a reserve call-up, (This does not prejudice
the still-open question whether or not the Reserves will be called up.)

(2) Assume and act on the basis that we are authorized to
deploy up to 260,000 personnel through March 31, 1966. (This is in lieu
of the existing authorization of 220,000 through February 28, 1966.)
However, it should be understood that if we need to go-above 260,000,
we will not hesitate to request further authorizations,

This contemplates the deployment by the end of the year of 102
coinbat maneuver battalions (including third country forces) and related
forces amounting to 429,000 U.S. military personnel.

There was discussion of extensions of tours, With respect to
the possible reserve call-up, this is to be subjected to intense critical
analysis over the next several weeks. It must be studied on a world~
wide basis, Furthermore General Westmoreland and Admival Sharp
have done a good deal of work on alternatives under Case | to call-up
of the reserves, Mr, McNamara has these studies. Dr, Wnthoven .
will reproduce therm and distribute them to the Service Secretaries
and the Chiefs of Staff,

‘| 30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

