Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

Indochina Internel Situation

Internal administration was transferred by the French to
the State Governments on December 30, 1949, except for certain
powers reserved to the French High Commissioner and certain inter-
state| matters to be settled by an interstate conference. This ©
conference was concluded in November 1950 when it was agreed that
all internal administration would be turned over by the French
to the State Governments by December 31, 1950, However, the

. piastre would continue to be pegged to the franc (at a rate

highly beneficial to the plastre); the French have militery base
rights similar to those of -the United States in the Philippines
as provided in the United Stetes-Philippine Treaty; and French
functionaries would continue to carry out certain educational,
war damage, and French military security functions. Other French
functionaries would be employed by the Associated States only as
desired by the latter,

The three State Governments are now limited in their assumption
of powers only by the availability of qualified indigenous officials
their dependence on continued French financial support and their d
lack of popular support, The planned formation during 1951 of
national armies is expected to contribute toward the actual
attainment of sovereignty in each State, This should have a
beneficial political effect in winning additional popular support
for the governments,

The most severe threat to the continued growth and even to
the continued existence of the State governments is the increased
capability of the Viet Minh forces, resulting from the extension
of military and materiel aid from Communist China. There is also |
some evidence of Soviet support. Such aid from Communist China |
began in ‘April 1950, and has increased steadily. Up to now, light:
artillery, mortars and automatic weapons have been shipped to
Indochina for the Viet Minh, Training centers in South China
have treined and equipped some 50 Viet Minh battalions which have
returned to Vietnem. The capacity of the training centers has
been estimated at 10 to 30 thousand men rotated about every three
months with some 50,000 having already completed their training,
It has been reported that there are 15 to 20 Chinese technicians
with each China-trained Viet Minh battalion, usually directing the
artillery. The capability of these troops is rated as equal to
that of French Union Forces. Chinese Communist troops in South
China, within easy striking distance of the border, are estimated
at two to three hundred thousand. Airfields at the border posts
evacuated by the French are avallable to the Viet Minh, and air
training is reportedly being conducted in China. However, no Viet
Minh air power has yet been used, and in this respect the French
Union Forces hold a present advantage due almost entirely to
United States Military Ald. French Naval power is also superior

423

TOP SECRET
