Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

Consistent with this, the summary stressed General Westmoreland's
concern...

",..over the inflexible time frame, the need for
additional forces to construct and man the obstacle sys-
tem, and the impact of using in-country or programmed
forces. He has made clear that the U.S, brigade or
regiment requested in the plan is but the first increment
of a full division and armored cavalry regiment force
required to man an effective obstacle system south of
the DMZ. Finally, he emphasizes that the course of
action set forth in the plan would not in itself stop
infiltration. In view of the numerous disadvantages
listed above, and in light of the need to maintain bal-
ance in all anti-infiltration programs, CINCPAC recommends
that the plan not be implemented within the time-frame
envisioned." 51)

All of which seems to be saying that if the troops required (1 div-
ision plus 1 regiment) were assigned to the barrier, it would probably
reach the desired effectiveness, but since they most likely will not come
from "outside" resources, and COMUSMACV does not desire to draw down other
forces for them, the barrier would probably not be very effective or meet
@ real threat anyway.

On the ground in SEA observers were painstakingly searching the
infiltration figures for indications of "reciprocal moves" on the part of
the VC/NVA, or the "fade-out" various individuals had been predicting.

The press was also speculating upon the political intent of North Vietnam,
led there by MACV's year-end infiltration statistics. A MACV "backgrounder"
in late 1966 had indicated a drastic falling off from earlier infiltration
levels. Little had been done in the interim to correct (or update) these
figures and speculetion was rife in early February. Phil Goulding was
frentically quizzing MACY for explanations. Military attaches were exper-
iencing pressure from their ambassadors for interpretations and analysis. 52/
PACOM-MACV answered queries with a detailed discussion outlining the prob-
lems of interpreting (or even developing) infiltration estimates; information
which may be useful at this point to highlight the problems and pitfalls

of “infiltration watching." CINCPAC wrote that it was:

"Our position... that the NVA must continue to infil-
trate at significant levels to maintain maturing force
structure. The VC cannot replace total communist losses
as well as provide additional personnel to flesh out their
joint (VC/NVA) planned force structure. It is true that
figures may appear to suggest that infiltration dropped off
sharply during last half 1966. Although statistical data
indicates infiltration appears to have dropped during latter

Wh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
