Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

They found slow, hard-slugging contest fatiguing to their spirits.
The reprisals of 5 August (Tonkin Gulf) had given them a lift, but
if indecisive bloodshed with the VC continued, they would probably
exert continuing and increasing pressure for direct attack upon
Hanoi. —

Concerning pacification, the Ambassador observed that the most
difficult part of the program was the civilian follow-up after the
clearing operation in the clear-and-hold program. The difficulty
stemmed from the inefficiency of the ministries. To energize these
civilian functions, USOM had increased its provincial representation
from 45 in March to 64 in July, but this was still insufficient,
despite the judgment of critical inefficiency in the ministries.
Taylor next reported that "U.S. observers reported in July that in
about 3/4 of the provinces GVN provincial and district officers were
performing effectively...." It was too soon to go into details
regarding Hop Tac, and the report on that program was in effect a
description of its objectives and rationale rather than a progress
report.

The Ambassador reported that on the military side, the person~
nel strength of RVNAF and of the paramilitary forces was slowly
rising and by January should reach about 98 percent of the target
strength of 446,000. COMUSMACV had reported at the end of July tnat
the actual GVN strength stood at 219,954 RVNAF, 88,560 Regional
Forces (formerly Civil Guard), and 127,453 Popular Forces (formerly
Self Defense Corps). 114/

III. FROM TONKIN TO NSAM-328
1. onkin Gulf and Following Political Crises

As already noted, the Ambassador's first monthly report was filed
just before the internal Vietnamese political storm broke in full force.
Through the late spring and into July of 1964, the Buddhist-Catholic
quarrel intensified. Students again began to demonstrate in Saigon and
Hue. By duly a coup plot was developing against Khanh led by his dis-
gruntled Vice Premier, Dr. Nguyen Ton Hoan, who was backed by the Dai
Viet and several top military leaders. But according to one of the
best authorities, known U.S. opposition to a coup made its leaders
hesitate and nothing immediately developed. 115 Then came the Tonkin
Gulf affair of 2-4 August, and the U.S. retaliatory strikes of 4-5
August.

An immediate effect of the raids was to shore up Khanh's weaken-
ing position. But contrary to prevailing theories and hopes, stability
was very short-lived. Khanh sought to exploit the affair by a radio
appeal for unity and national discipline. He did not arrest the coup

90 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
