Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The over-all troop strengths of friendly and VC/NVA
forces by Corps Area are shown in Attachments I and II.

All things considered, there is consensus that we
are no longer in danger of losing this war militarily.

Regrettably, the "other war" against the VC is still
not going well. Corruption is widespread. Real govern-
ment control ig confined to enclaves. There is rot in
the fabric. Our efforts to enliven the moribund political
infrastructure have been matched by VC efforts -- more now
through coercion than was formerly the case. So the VC
are hurting badly too. In the Delta, because of the
redeployment of some VC/NVA troops to the area north of
Saigon, the VC have lost their momentum and appear to be
conducting essentially a holding operation. On the
government side there, the tempo of operations has been
correspondingly low. The population remains apathetic,
and many local government officials seem to have working
_ arrangements with the VC which they are reluctant to dis-
turb.

The National Liberation Front (NLF) continues to
control large parts of South Vietnam, and there is little
evidence that the revolutionary development program is
gaining any momentum. The Army of South Vietnam (ARVN)
is tired, passive and accommodation-prone, and is moving
too slowly if at all into pacification work.

The enemy no doubt continues to believe that we will
not be able to translate our military success in the "big war"
into the desired "end products" -- namely, broken enemy morale
and political achievements by the Government of Vietnam (GVN).
At the same time, the VC must be concerned about decline in
morale among their ranks. Defections, which averaged 400
per week last year, have, until a slump near the end of
April, been running at more than 1000 a week; very few
defectors, however, are important people.

The transition to a government in Saigon responsive
to the South Vietnamese people is moving as well as can be
expected. A Constituent Assembly was elected last fall.
A constitution has been adopted. Local elections, involving
more than 50 per cent of the rural population and a 77-80
per cent turnout, have taken place despite the shadow cast
by VC assassinations and kidnappings. The Buddhists have
launched a new "peace" campaign with an immolation, but

1h9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
