Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive’

continuation of progrem. We may hear further from London
following his report but would now expect to maintain decision
and indeed Taylor would probably have gone ahead on political
side. If matter comes up you may of course note that we have
held off five days but that British have not had any indication
of Soviet response so that further delay now appeared unwise.
We continue of course attach major importance to UK/Soviet
gambit... 73/ ;

Confidence that the Co-Chairman initiative would pay off was beginning
to wane, and the air strikes were indeed being rescheduled for February 26.
A continuous readiness to launch had in fact been maintained every since
February 20, by simply postponing the strikes for 2 hours at a time and
laying on new strikes whenever a change in targets or in operating rules
had been decided upon. The February 26 operation was the fourth repro-
gramming of the strikes and thus went by the code.designation ROLLING
THUNDER IV, even though RT's I through III had been scratched. 74/

Fully expecting that the February 26 air operation would go off
as planned, State sent out a cable 75/ to thirteen posts, quoting the
probable text of a joint GVN/US announcement that was to be made at about
2:00 a.m. Washington time on February 26, and instructing all addressees
to contact their respective host governments as soon as FLASH notification
was received that the mission had in fact been executed. The execution
messages however, never came. Weather over the entire target area in
North Vietnam had closed in, forcing another postponement and, ultimately,
cancellation of the strikes. The weather remained adverse for four more
days. It was not until March 2 that the first of the new program strikes,
dubbed ROLLING THUNDER V was actually carried out. :

D. Efforts at Public Justification and Persuasion

: The need to communicate the new policy promptly and persuasively
to the public had been recognized throughout the 1964 planning process as
an essential ingredient of any graduated pressures campaign. Now the time
had come to put the information and education plans into effect.

Over the weekend of February 12, serious work was begun in the
State Department on the preparation of a "White Paper” on the infiltra-
tion of men and supplies from the North. Su¢ch a public report was con-
sidered essential to justifying any program of U.S. military operations
against North Vietnam. The compilers of the exhibits for the public
record were handicapped however, by the fact that the most persuasive
evidence on DRV infiltration and support was derived from Special Intelli-
gence sources which could not be revealed without embarrassment and detri-
ment to other U.S. security interests. The White Paper that was submitted
to the U.S. public and to the United Nations on February 27, therefore,
did not make as strong a case as it might have of the extent and nature of
DRV involvement in the war in the South. It did serve, however, to put the
U.S. case in the public record and to affirm the limited nature of U.S.
objectives toward North Vietnam. 76/

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
