Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ball was, of course, alone among the Vietnam principals in
arguing for de-escalation and political "compromise." At the same
time that he and Rusk wrote these papers, Assistant Secretary of State
William Bundy and Secretary of Defense McNamara also went on record
with recommendations for the conduct of the war. Bundy's paper, "A
'iddle Way' Course of Action in South Vietnam,” argued for a delay
in further U.S. troop commitments and in escalation of the bombing
campaign against North Vietnam, but a delay only in order to allow
the American public time to digest the fact that the United States
was engaged in a land war on the Asian mainland, and for U.S. com-
manders to make certain that their men were, in fact, capable of
fighting effectively in conditions of counter-insurgency warfare with-
out either arousing the hostility of the local population or causing
the Vietnamese government and army simply to ease up and allow the
Americans to "take over" their war. 7/

For McNamara, however, the military situation in South
Vietnam was too serious to allow the luxury of delay. In @ memoran-
dum to the President drafted on 1 July and then revised on 20 July,
immediately following his return from a week-long visit to Vietnam,
he recommended an immediate decision to increase the U.S.-Third
Country presence from the current 16 maneuver battalions (15 U.S.,
one Australian) to 44 (34 U.S., nine Korean, one Australian), and a
change in the mission of these forces from one of providing support
and reinforcement for the ARVN to one which soon became known as
“search and destroy" -- as McNamara put it, they were "by aggressive
exploitation of superior military forces...to gain and hold the
initiative...pressing the fight against vc/DRV main force units in
South Vietnam to run them to ground and destroy them." 8/

At the same time, McNamara argued for a substantial intensi-
fication of the air war. The 1 July version of his memorandum recom-
mended a total quarantine of the movement of war supplies into North
Vietnam, by sea, rail, and road, through the mining of Haiphong and
all other harbors and the destruction of rail and road bridges leading
from China to Hanoi; the Secretary also urged the destruction of
fighter airfields and SAM sites "as necessary" to accomplish these

objectives. 9

On 2 July the JCS, supporting the views in the DPM, reiterated
a recommendation for immediate implementation of an intensified bombing
program against NVN, to accompany the additional deployments which were
under consideration. 10/ The recommendation was for a sharp escalation
of the bombing, with the emphasis on interdiction of supplies into as
well as out of NVN. Like the DPM, it called for interdicting the move-
ment of "war supplies" into NVN by mining the major ports and cutting
the rail and highway bridges on the LOCs from China to Hanoi; mounting
intensive armed reconnaissance against all LOCs and LOC facilities

) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
