10,

2,

ise

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Matthews reports to President Truman of French desires

to participate in Far East war and the JCS view that

little military value would accrue from the French

forces. Memorandum by Matthews for Truman, 16 May 1945........ 27

Grew reviews for Hurley the present position of U.S.

policy on "trusteeship structure" and the necessity of

"“yoluntary" action.by colonial powers and that the extent

of French participation in the war in the Pacific was

to be determined by Gen MacArthur. Grew 873 to Hurley (China)

PP ROTI Ae BILD Sl acd scdbeieinne Bike Woaste th oiecel Wn eae! wba je arg cece wa eaTe Welles tn Se OO

The U.S, military reply to the French offer of partici-

pation (by two French divisions)in the Pacific war out-

lines the provisions to acceptance in principle. Essen-

tially, the U.S. desires complete command and control of

the French trained, equipped and maintained divisions

with movement from France based on the units having

attained U.S, combat standards. Memorandum by U.S.

Chiefs of Staff to Combined Chiefs of Staff at Potsdam,

GMT GEAOUDS Sly Spencer Wade in sowie eteitereelewd-se «ela Mae anis wean ce OS

The U.S. Chiefs of Staff views that logistics considera-

tions prevented French and Dutch participation in the

Pacific war are presented to the Combined Chiefs of

Staff for consideration. Memorandum by the U.S. Chiefs

GP Steal at Potedan, 16 Jaly IGS vecac ever acvevesvicdenuweccise BO

The British Chiefs of Staff suggest that the French

divisions be "employed in due course in French Indo-

China.” Memorandum by British Chiefs of Staff at

POtSdAM, LOWLY TONS. scwasvwacecasiaceoceeueusessswascecssc: Ot

The U.S. Chiefs of Staff consider the British view

and compromise earlier U.S. positions to allow for

possible use of French divisions under British command

in areas to "be determined later.” Memorandum by

U.S. Chiefs of Staff at Potsdam, 19 July 1945.......ceeeeeceee 37

Report to the President and Prime Minister of the agreed
summary of conclusions on the strategic concept and
policies for prosecution of the war, reached by the
Combined Chiefs of Staff at the terminal conference

of the Postdam meeting. Basically, the Chiefs’ stra-
tegy focused on Japan with the U.S, controlling opera-
tions. The door was left open for French and Dutch

‘participation based on "military considerations" and

"shipping" requirements. JCS files, CCS 900/3,
oh July GHG a ov 6b nie ie aiecblacers larereiainiwle Sse Lele a'ib aes GOs wie lace hiss a neem ete 39

: i fii TOP SECRET - Sensitive

