Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

did not entirely agree, was that a coup would most likely produce a
civil war, Hilsman felt that the likelihood of general chaos in the
wake of a coup was less thsn it had been the preceding year. (Notes

on this briefing, reproduced in the Appendix, provide the first docu-
ppg of highest level consideration of the ramifications of
a coup.

In a meeting at State the following day, July 5, Ambassador
Nolting, who had cut short his vacation to return to Washington in the
wake of the Buddhist erisis, told Under Secretary of State George Ball:

In his view if a revolution occurred in Viet-Nam which
grew out of the Buddhist situation, the country would be
split between feuding factions and the Americans would
haye to withdraw and the country might be lost to the Com-
munists. This led to the question of how much pressure we
could exert on Diem. Mr. Nolting replied that if we
repudiated him on this issue his government would fall.
The Ambassador believed that Diem would live up to the
agreement (June 16) unless he believed that he was dealing
with a political attempt to cause his overthrow. 28/

Earlier in the same interview he had said:

- « « that although interference by the Nhus was
serious, he believed that the GVN would be able to come
through this one slowly. As to tactics, the more Diem
was prodded the slower he went. While Nhu was trouble-
some he was chiefly responsible for gains which had been
made in the provincial pacification program. 29/

Nolting, no doubt, expressed similar views when he met with Secretary
McNamara before returning to Saigon.

In spite of the mounting political pressure on the President in
Congress and in the press because of the Buddhist repressions, the
Administration decided to send Nolting back for another try at getting
Diem to settle the dispute with the Buddhists. Anxiety in Washington
mounted as the summer wore on, and Nolting's efforts with Diem produced
evident progress. By the time of the August 21 raids, Washington's
patience with Diem was all but exhausted.

AUS, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
