Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"While accomplishing all this the Marines were feeling,
with growing impact, a cardinal counterinsurgency principle:
that if local forces do not move in promptly behind the
offensive effort, then first line forces must be diverted to
provide the essential hamlet security, pclice and stabilization.
The alternative is to risk the development of vacua, into which
the VC guerrilla can flow. This condition grew during the
period. The Popular Forces and police were inadequate in
numbers and in quality to do their part of the job, as the
Marines did theirs. This operated to complicate the Marines'
problem by making the civic action effort more difficult,
by permitting harassment of our forces, and by making possible
@ suicide attack on the Chu Lao and Marble Mountain areas.

"The end of the period saw the 676 square mile III MAF
area of influence more stable, more prosperous, and far more
hopeful, but it saw also an urgent need for efficient regional
or local forces to take up their proper burden, so the Marines
can maintain the momentum of their search/clear/pacification
efforts. It is plain that the most efficient way to bring this
about is to give III MAF substantial authority over the RF or
PF serving in this area, in order that they may be properly
trained and properly led." 31/

This summary, written in the headquarters of the man often regarded as
the philosopher of the Marine Corps, shows the Marines in the process
of swinging their emphasis around -- turning away from the offensive
against the enemy waiting in the nearby hills, and towards the people
and the VC guerrillas among the people inside their TAOR.

It was a crucial, difficult decision for the men who made it.
Significantly, the indications are strong that the decision was made
almost entirely inside Marine Corps channels, through a chain of
command that bypassed COMUSMACV and the civilian leaders of our
government, and ran from General Greene through General Krulak to
General Walt. The files do not reveal discussions of the implications,
feasibility, cost, and desirability of the Marine strategy among high-
ranking officials in the Embassy, MACV headquarters, the Defense and
State Departments. Yet in retrospect it seems clear that the strategy
the Marines proposed to follow, a strategy about which they made no
secret, was in sharp variance with the strategy of the other U.S. units
in the country, with far-ranging political implications that could even
affect the ultimate chances for negotiations.

It should be clear that the Marine concept of operations has a
different implicit time requirement than a more enemy-oriented
search and destroy effort. It is not within the scope of this paper
to analyze the different requirements, but it does appear that the
Marine strategy, which General Walt sometimes described as the

LT TOP SECRET - Sensitive
