Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

" ..-Prudence dictates that we use enough force to achieve the
essential purpose of deterring or repelling aggression. That has been
the practice of all four of our postwar Presidents. That is the road
which offers the best hope of reaching a reliable peace. :

"For we can never forget that our objective is a secure peace. We~-
want nothing else from anybody, anywhere in the world."

* * *

61. Address by Secretary Rusk before the Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation of State Colleges and National Association of State Universities
and Land-Grant Colleges at Washington, D.C., November 15, 1966, "The
Future of the Pacific Community ; Department of State Bulletin,
Mecenoc os 1000s. Be Osos a cue | peo) Panam owe

December 5, 1966, p. 338.

eM ae

"AGGRESSION IN SOUTH VIET-NAM

"But indirect aggression by infiltration of men and arms across
frontiers is still with us. It was tried in. Greece, in Malaya, in the
Philippines, and now in South Viet-Nam. The label ‘civil war' or 'war
of national liberation' does not make it any less an aggression. ‘The
purpose is to impose on others an unwanted regime. It substitutes terror
for persuasion, force for free choice. And especially if it succeeds, it
contains the inherent threat of further aggression--and eventually a great
war."

Cie bel Gar

"The militant Asian Communists have themselves proclaimed the attack
on South Viet-Nam to be a critical test of this technique. And beyond
South Viet-lNam and Laos they have openly designated Thailand as the next
target."

7 Se 36

"Now, as a generation ago, some people are saying that if you let
an aggressor take just one more bite, he will be satisfied. But one of
the plainest lessons of our times is that one aggression leads to another--
but the initial aggressor and perhaps by others who decide there would be
profit in emulating him.

“Some assert that we have no national security interest in South Viet-
Wam and Southeast Asia. But thet is not the judgment of those who have
borne the high responsibilities for the safety of the United States. Begin-
ning with President Truman, four successive Presidents, after extended con-
sultation with their principal advisers, have decided that we have a very
important interest in the security of that area.

. D-92
