Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The 'wars of national liberation’ approach has been adopted as an
essential element of Communist China's expansionist policy. If this
technique adopted by Hanoi shouid be allowed to succeed in Viet-Nen,
we would be confirming Peiping's contention that militant revolutionary
struggle is a more productive Communist path than Moscow's doctrine of
peaceful coexistence... We could expect ‘wars of national liberation’ to
spread. Thailand has already been identified by Communist China as
being the next target for a so-called ‘liberation struggle.’ Peiping's
Foreign Minister Chen Yi has promised it for this year. Laos, Malaysia,
Burma--one Asian nation after another--could expect increasing Communist
pressures. Other weakly defended nations on other continents would
experience this new threat of aggression by proxy.

"Bven the Asian Communists have acknowledged that Viet-Nam repre-
sents an important test situation for indirect aggression. North Viet-
Nam's Premier Pham Van Dong recently commented that: ~y

'The experience of our compatriots in South Viet-Nem attracts
the attention of the world, especially the peoples of South America.'

"General /Vo Nguyen/ Giap, the much-touted leader of North Viet-
Nam's army, was even more explicit. In another recent statement, he
said that,

"South Viet-Nem is the model of the national liberation move-
ment of our time....If the special warfare that the U.S. imperialists
are testing in South Viet-Nam is overcome, then it can be defeated every-
where in the world..'

"Our strong posture in Viet-lNam then seeks peace and security in
three dimensions: for South Viet-Nam, for the sake of Southeast Asia's
independence and security generally, and for the other small nations
that would face the same kind of subversive threat from without if the
Communists were to succeed in Viet-lam...."

%* &

"All this, of course, is contrary to the 1954 Geneva accords on
Viet-Nam and the 1962 agreement on Iaos. I mention the latter because
it is an established fact that Hanoi has been both threatening Iaos
and using Laos as a corridor for supplying personnel and arms to the
Viet Cong.

"Our State Department has documented the character and intensity
of North Viet-Nam's aggressive efforts since 1959 in the recent white
paper, and in the similar report issued in 1961. The 1962 report of
the International Control Commission for Viet-Nam also spelled out North
Viet-Nam's aggressive actions in flagrant violation of the 1954 and 1962
agreements."
