Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Dispatch one or two high-level civilians to Saigon
with General Taylor to warn the GVN that it must broaden
their base of political support, end its internal bickering,
purge corrupt officers and officials, and move to develop
efficient administration and effective forces. They should
also begin a discussion of negotiations while informing the
GVN of the increased support to be provided for ARVN.

6. Deliver a Presidential address to the American public,
explaining our new strategy in light of the enemy's new
tactics. 57/

In short, then, this initial reassessment of our strategy in SVN
indicated to the President that no ground strategy and no level of addi-
tional U.S. forces alone could achieve an early end to the war. That
could be done only if the GVN took the steps necessary to provide effec-
tive military and political leadership to its population. In order to
speed up this process, the U.S. should limit its objectives in SVN and
adopt a strategy of population security. This would give the GVN time to
organize and develop democratic institutions, and would give RVNAF time to
grow in effectiveness while our forces provided a protective screen for
the populated areas at minimum cost in resources and casualties.

This paper was discussed within the military community at a meeting
in the Secretary of Defense's office on 1 March. General Wheeler, the ©
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was appalled at the apparent repudi-
ation of American military policy in South Viet Nam contained in the ISA
Draft Memorandum. He detected two "fatal flaws" in the population security
stratesy.-

1. The proposed strategy would mean increased fighting in or close
to population centers and, hence, would result in increased civilian casualties.

2. By adopting a posture of static defense, we would allow the enemy
an increased capability of massing near population centers, especially north
of Saigon.

In addition, General Wheeler was equally appalled at the statement in
the ISA Draft Presidential Memorandum to the effect that "MACV does not
clearly specify how he would use the additional forces he requests, except
to indicate that they would provide him with a theater reserve and an
offensive capability." MACV had indeed clearly and specifically indicated
to CINCPAC on 27 February, concurrent with General Wheeler's original memoran-
dum to the President, the locations and missions of the requested add-on
units. These had been transmitted through the Joint Staff to each of the
Services, who indeed were engaged in studying and staffing these proposals. 58/
Apparently, this information had not specifically been furnished to the

Office of the Secretary of Defense.

he TOP SECRET - Sensitive
