Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and the world's hopes for peace in the balance every day,

I do not believe that I should devote an hour or a day

of my time to any personal partisan causes or to any duties
other than the awesome duties of this office -- the Presi-
dency of your country.

Accordingly, I shall not seek, and I will not accept, the
nomination of my Party for another term as your President.

But let men everywhere know, however, that a strong, a
eonfident, and a vigilant America stands ready tonight to
seek an honorable peace -- and stand ready tonight to defend
an honored cause ~- whatever the price, whatever the burden,
whatever the sacrifices that duty may require.

Thank you for listening.

Good night and God bless all of you.

11. Epilogue

On April 4, 1968, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, in a memorandum

for the Seeretaries of the Military Departments and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff established Southeast Asia Deployment Program #6.
This progrem added 24,500 personnel to the approved Program #5, and placed
a new ceiling of 549,500 on U.S, forces in South Vietnam. 100/ None of
the some 200,000 troops requested by General Westmoreland on 27 February
were to be deployed.

Late in the afternoon of April 3, 1968, the White House released the

following statement by President Johnson:

Today the Government of North Vietnam made a statement
which included the following paragraph, and I quote:

“However, for its part, the Government of the Demo-
eratic Republic of Vietnam declares its readiness to
appoint its representatives to contact the United States
representative with a view to determining with the
American side the unconditional cessation of the United
States bombing raids and all other acts of war against
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam so that talks may

start."

Last Sunday night I expressed the position of the
United States with respect to peace in Vietnam and South-

east Asia as follows:

"Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to
send its representatives to any forum, at any time, to
discuss the means of bringing this war to an end."

90 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
