Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Washington had decreed OCO, end had given Porter great responsibility

Unfortunately, they had failed to give him authority and stature needed
to make the agencies work together.

As pointed out before, this might well have been overcome if time

had not been so short, The slow methodical wuy of moving bureaucracies
may be more effective than sweeping changes, anyway, if one has time.
But in Vietnam no one was being given much time.

Shortly after OCO was formed, Komer's deputy, Ambassador William

Leonhart, visited Vietnam, and when he returned, wrote the following
penetrating assessment, which was sent to the President, Secretaries
Rusk and Meliamara, and Mr. Gaud and Mr. Helms:

"Whether Porter's new Office of Civil Operations (0CO)
is viewed as a final organizational solution or as an inevyit-
able intermediate step it is achieving a number of useful
purposes. It establishes, on the civil side for the first
time, unified interagency direction with a chain of command
and communication from Saigon to the regions and provinces,
It centralizes US-GVi) field coordination of civil matters in
one US official at each level, It affords a civil-side framework
which can work more effectively with US military for politico-
military coordination and more integrated pacification planning.

"At the time of my visit, OCO's impact had been felt
meinly in Saigon. Its headquarters organization was largely
completed. Three of the four Regional Directors had been
named, all were at work, and one was in full time residence
in his region. Regional staffs were being assembled but not
yet in place. At province level, teams were being inter-
viewed for the selection of Provincial Representatives.

Porter expects them to be designated by January 1. Some

slippage is possible, and it may be 90 days or so before the

new organization is functioning. I participated in the initial
briefings of the province teams I visited, passing along and
empheasiving Bob Komer's admonitions against over-bureaucratization
of effort and for fast and hard action. These were well-
received, Morale was good, All the GYN Province Chiefs with
whom I talked thought the new structure a great improvement." 3/

-

126
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
