Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Around the middle of January 1966, Ky addressed the Armed Forces
Convention. He announced the prospective formation, after Tet, of a
"Democracy Building Council" to serve as a constituent assembly and
legislature. It would write a new constitution by October, 1966, pre~
paratory to elections in 1967. This was the opening shot in what
became a big issue within a few weeks. 37/

4. The Honolulu Conference of February 6-8, 1966

By late January, it was clear that Lodge's policy of not pushing GV
too hard may have helped keep things amicable but permitted pacification
to keep lagging and permitted economic problems to grow serious. With
conspicuous haste that caused GVN some loss of fece, the U.S. summoned
Thieu, Ky, and other GVYN officials to Honolulu to express renewed and
heightened U.S, concern. The U.S, wanted to re-emphasize pacification,
with a corresponding shift of authority from the ARVN line command to
the province chiefs; and it wanted strong action to limit inflation, to
clear the Saigon Port, and to limit the unfavorable effect of U.S. deploy-.
ments on the U.S, balance of payments. 38/

For the first time in over a year, the U.S. bargained hard with GVI
on issues Of these kinds. The GVH agreed to the main U.S, demands on
authority for the provinces chiefs. Moreover, it promised fiscal reform,
devaluation, port and customs reform, and the use of GVIli dollar balances
to finance additional imports. The GVW also agreed that an International
Monetary Fund team should be invited to give technical advice on these
economic programs. Thiev and Ky promised to go ahead with a new consti-
tution, to be drafted by an appointed Advisory Council, and then ratified
by popular vote in-late 1966; following that, they promised, the CViI
would create an elected government rooted in the constitution. The U.S.
promised to increase AID imports to #400 million in 1966, plus $150 million
in project assistance. t

Altogether the two governments exchanged over 60 agreed points and
assurances, ranging over free world (third country) assistance, rural
construction (pacification), refugees, political development, Montagnards,
Chieu Hoi, health, education, agriculture, and economic and financial pro- -
grems. This package was far more specific than any previous us/GvN agree-
ment. ‘Their public statements after the conference emphasized social
justice, the promise of elected government, and the U.S. lack of interest
in bases or permanent alliance in South Vietnam.

In a public, appearance at the conference, President Johnson embraced
Prime Minister Vy, before photographers. Although it caused no loss of
face directly, in the eyes of many observers this act added to the im-
pression that Ky was tied to our apron strings. If Lodge sensed this
effect, he said nothing about it; characteristically, he said to State
that the Honolulu Conference was good psychologically for Vietnam.

9 TOP SUCRET - Sensitive
