Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

particularly Mr. Dulles, tried to put teeth into SEATO through unilateral
declarations of U.S. readiness to act. Dulles defined the obligations
under Article IV as "a clear and definite agreement on the part of the
signatories, including the United States, to come to the aid of any
member of the Pact who under the terms of this treaty is subjected to
aggression." 12/ However, Dulles failed to instill the same Cesar ees
to instant intervention in the other SEATO members.

The obligation assumed at Manila emphasized the importance
attached to Southeast Asia by the U.S. Government. U.S. refusal to
pledge unqualified support to Indochina emphasized the need for
indigenous strength and stability in the area to counter communist
power, to make infiltration and aggression less appetizing to the
enemy. Of the three Indochina states, most important yet least stable
and least strong was South Vietnam. Thus, the second step in policy
development was to decide what the U.S. could do to change the situa-
tion, a decision which turned on what France could or would do in
South Vietnam.

2. Alternative French Policies

That France and the United States would eventually part
company over Vietnam might have been predicted in August 1954, when
U.S. policy toward Vietnam was drawn. Formulae for economic, military
and especially political courses of action were different from -- often
antithetical to -- French objectives and interests.

The U.S. intelligence community felt if France "acted
swiftly to insure Vietnam full independence and to encourage strong
nationalist leadership . . . anti-French nationalist activity might
be lessened (and) with French military and economic assistance --
backed by U.S. aid -- the Vietnamese could proceed to develop gradually
an effective security force, local government organization ami a long
range program for economic and social reform." 13/ But there were
three other routes or combinations of routes open to France in post-
Geneva Vietnam. France could work to maintain French Union ties,
indirect French political control and economic domination rather
than grant full independence to Vietnam. Or, France could try to
reach an agreement with the Viet Minh, expedite elections and achieve
a unified country in which French cultural, economic and political
interests could be maintained. A fourth possibility, thought likely
only if the situation deteriorated to the point of hopelessness, was
a French decision to withdraw all military, economic and administra-
tive support from Indochina. 1/

Of the four courses of action open to France, three were

rejected, by the Eisenhower Administration. Continuation of French
Union ties plus indirect French controls would be impossible under Diem,

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
