Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Lao Dong Party itself was purged with particular
attention to the demonstrably unreliable rural membership acquired
during the latter stages of Land Reform, and Nhan Dan through the
spring of 1957 reported on continuing difficulty in restoring the
Party's rapport in the countryside. At the same time, the press
carried a number of graphic accounts,of life in DRV prison camps. ky /

In early 1957, in emulation of Mao, the DRV sponsored
a "hundred flowers" campaign, and as in China, the regime was surprised
by the sharpness of intellectual criticism which it evoked. 45/ The
Hundred Flowers movement lasted in full bloom only about three months,
but the literary license stimulated an unusual outflow of verse and fable,
in which Land Reform, PAVN, foreign advisers, and the Party cadre were
all criticized. Eventually the barbs became unbearable for the Iao Dong,
and the flow of newsprint to opposition papers Was eut, printers went
on strike, and a particularly cutting journal, Nhan-Van ("Humanism," a
pun on Nhan-Dan), was forbidden to publish. Arrests and trials followed
and by mid-1957 the voice of the intellectuals had all but been stilled.
Nevertheless, as late as 1960, official releases were still deprecating
literature which did not meet regime criteria for "proletarian writings."

By mid 1957, the DRV had reversed its policy on Catholics--
six months after the "Rectification" rapprochement of December 1956. The
denunciation of priests was resumed, and the Church was aceused of political
activities. In 1959, a more intense campaign of harassment was undertaken,
including newspaper barrages depicting the Catholic clergy as the greatest
obstacle to collectives in farm regions. Church activity was severely
restricted; all non-Vietnamese priests and nuns were expelled; and the
movement of the native clergy was rigidly cireunseribed. Catholic schools
closed rather than accept DRV political instructors. Western observers
in Hanoi in 1962 noted that congregations in Hanoi were composed invariably
of the aged. Fall reported that as of that year there were but 5 bishops
and 320 priests remaining in the DRY. 46/

The DRV, like the GVN, also resorted to population reloca-
tions: the forced migration of Vietnamese from overcrowded, potentially
dissident coastal regions into areas inhabited by minority peoples. The
tribal people of North Vietnam comprised about 15% of the population thinly
settled over about 40% of the country. 47/ These folk had always resisted
government from outside their tribal society. The French made only a
pretense of governing them. Racially differentiated from the Vietnamese,
the highlander-lowlander relationship historically proceeded from hostility
on the one hand and contempt on the other. Even Truong Chinh was unwilling
to press strongly his Land Reform Campaign against the patriarchal tribal
system, but to the extent that he did, violence ensued. In Vo Nguyen Giap's
catalog of mistakes recited on 29 October 1956 (supra), these difficulties
were admitted, and concessions to the minorities were part of the Rectifi-
cation of Errors. The Constitution of 1960 guaranteed the preservation of
minority languages and cultures, and autonomy for joecal government. More
than 70% of public administration in the northeast border region was placed

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
