Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

settle this by negotiation. We send them messages through
allies - one country, two countries, three countries, four
or five countries - all have tried to be helpful. The dis-
tinguished British citizen, Mr. (Patrick Gordon) Walker,
has been out there, and they say, we can't even talk to you.
All our intelligence is unanimous in this one point, that
they see no need for negotietion. They think they are
winning and they have won and why should they sit down and
give us something and settle with us. 118

But while the public clamor persisted and became more and more
difficult to ignore, the President was receiving intelligence assess-
ments from Saigon and from Washington that tended +o confirm his reading
of Hanoi's disinterest in negotiations, but that provided hin with a
quite different argument for a bombing pause at this time: if the con-
flict was going to have to be expanded and bombing intensified before
Henoi would "come-to reason," it would be easier and politically more
palatable to do so after a pause, which would afford an opoortunity for
the enemy's intentions to be more clearly revealed.

On May 4, in response to an urgent request from Washington, Am-
passador Taylor submitted a U.S. Mission "Assessment of pRV/VC Probable
Courses of Action During the Next Three Months." The assessment con-
firmed the Washington view thet Hanoi continued to have a very favorable
view of its prospects for victory:

..Tone of statements emenating from Hanoi since [Febru-
ary and March/ indicate that the DRV has not weakened in its
determination to continue directing and supporting Viet Cong
and seeking flirther intensificetion of war in the South.

From DRV viewsoint, outlook is probably still favorable
despite air strikes on North. Although their general
transportation system in North has been significantly damaged,
thus somewhat reducing their infiltration capability, Hanoi
may calculate it can accept level of damage being inflicted
as reasonable price to pay for chance of victory in South.
Viet Cong forces in south retain capability of taking local
initiatives on ground, although they must accept cost of
heavier losses from tacticel air support, and their morale
possibly has been reduced by recent develonments. GVN force ~ .
levels still are not edequate to cope with these Viet Cong
capabilities. Despite relative longevity of Quat Govt.,
which marks'improvement over previous recent Govts., politi-
cal situation is still basically unstable. While military
and civilian morale has risen, rumblings among generals con-
tinue, suspicion among political and religious groups
persist and are subject to exoloitation by communists. On
palance, Henoi probably believes it hes considerable basis

LOT TOP SECRET - Sensitive
