OF

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Hanoi's Communist backers have assumed the economic costs
to a degree that has significantly cushioned the impact

3. The aspects of the basic situation that have
enabled Hanoi to continue its support of military opera-
tions in the South and to neutralize the impact of U.S.
bombing by passing the economic costs to other Communist
countries are not likely to be altered by reducing the
present geographic constraints, mining Haiphong and the
principal harbors in North Vietnam, increasing the number
of armed reconnaissance sorties and otherwise expanding the
U.S. air offensive along the lines now contemplated in
military recommendations and planning studies.

An expansion of the bombing program along such lines
would make it more difficult and costly for Hanoi to
move essential military supplies through North Vietnam to the
vc/NVN forces in the South. The low volume of supplies
required, the demonstrated effectiveness of the counter-
measures already undertaken by Hanoi, the alternative options
that the NVN transportation network provides and the level
of aid the USSR and China seem prepared to provide, how-
ever, make it quite unlikely that Hanoi's capability to
function as a logistic funnel would be seriously impaired.
Our past experience also indicates that an intensified air
campaign in-NVN probably would not prevent Hanoi from infil-
trating men into the South at the present or a higher rate,
if it chooses. Furthermore, there would appear to be no
basis for assuming that the damage that could be inflicted by
an intensified air offensive would impose such demands on
the North Vietnamese labor force that Hanoi would be unable
to continue and expand its recruitment and training of mili-
tary forces for the insurgency in the South.

h, While conceptually it is reasonable to assume that
some limit may be imposed on the scale of military activity
-that Hanoi can maintain in the South by continuing the
ROLLING THUNDER program at the present, or some higher level
of effort, there appears to be no basis for defining that
limit in concrete terms or, for concluding that the present
scale of VC/NVN activities in the field have approached that

limit.

The available evidence clearly indicates that Hanoi has
been infiltrating military forces and supplies into South
Vietnam at an accelerated rate during the current year.
Intelligence estimates have concluded that North Vietnam is
capable of substantially.increasing its support.

151 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
