se
Po.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

plants are out of action....All large military
facilities should be destroyed in Northern NVN....

3. We should mount an intensified armed reconnsaissance
program without sortie restriction, to harass, dis-
rupt and attrit/e / the dispersed and hidden military
facilities and activities south of 20 deg/rees/....

These three tasks well done will bring the enemy to
the conference table or cause the insurgency to wither
from lack of support. The alternative appears to be a
long and costly counterinsurgency -- costly in U.S. and
GVN lives and material resources. 43/

Writing the Secretary of Defense on January 18, the
Joint Chiefs offered an equally bold definition of a post-pause
bombing campaign. The Chiefs argued that the piecemeal nature of
previous attacks had permitted the DRV to adapt itself to the bomb-
-ing, replenish and disperse its stocks, diversify its transportation
system and improve its defenses. Complaining about the geographic
and numerical restrictions on the bombing, the Chiefs recommended
thet "offensive air operations against NVN should be resumed now with
a sharp blow and thereafter maintained with uninterrupted, increasing
pressure. 4/ The Chiefs further argued that,

These operations should be conducted in such a
manner and be of sufficient magnitude to: deny the
DRV large-scale external assistance; destroy those
resources already in NVN which contribute most to the
support of aggression; destroy or deny use of military
facilities; and harass, disrupt and impede the movement
of men and materials into SvN. 5/

The shutting off of external assistance would require,

..-closing of the ports as well as sustained inter-
diction of land LOCs from China....Military considera-
tions would dictate that mining be conducted now; however,
the Joint Chiefs...appreciate the sensitivity of such a
measure and recognize that precise timing must take into
account political factors. 46/

: In addition to endorsing the full~scale attacks on POL,
electric power plants, large military facilities in northern NVN, and
LOC centers and choke points with intensified armed reconnaissance,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
32
