Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive

destruction, but the paralysis of the DRV's industrial and urban life. By
taking out all the major electric power stations, he pelieved, Hanoi would
be presented "with an immediate desparate economic, social, and political
problem which could not be evaded."

In the May memorandum, however, he was not confining his confident
expertise to the sphere of targeting strategy, but extending it to the much
larger sweep of the U.S. policy objectives in Vietnam. Rostow's grand
historic perspective of the road to victory, unfortunately, never focused
down upon the nagging practical problem of how the U.S. might “make VC
hopes of military and political progress wane” when compelled to fight in
behalf of a long-besieged, teetering GVN that was, by this time, hopelessly
incapable of coping with the military and political tasks required of it.
The critical problem of how to preserve and restore political effectiveness
in the GVN never engaged Rostow's serious attention nor, for that matter,
that of his contemporaries in the administration. ~

Upward ar i,

In line with the April decision to give priority to South Vietnam
over North Vietnam in the employment of U.S. air power, a major administra-
tion decision was taken after the bombing pause to assign saturation bomb-
ing missions in the South to SAC B-52 bombers which had long been alerted,
but never used, to attack North Vietnam. General Westmoreland, with Ambas-
sador Taylor's political endorsement, presented his case +o CINCPAC in the
following terms: 150/ :

1. During recent months firm intelligence has been collected using
all possible sources which confirms existence of various VC headquarters
complexes and troop concentrations in RVN. Each of these targets
(COSVN, NAMBO, Military Region Has, VC battalions in jungle assembly
areas, etc,) is spread over a relatively large area and consists of
groups of buildings or huts, foxholes, trenches, tunnels, etce, connected
by trails. General topography is more suitable for area carpet bombing
than for pinpoint tactical fighter weapon delivery. In most areas two
and three canopy jungle growth hides surface target. Hven if accurate
coordinates fixed on maps (with inherent map inaccuracies) or photos,
solid jungle cmopy provides few reasonable aiming points for delivery
aircraft.

2. Operation Black Virgin 1 on 15 April 1965 was an attack on
the military component of the Central Office South Vietnam (coswN),
(the main VC military headquarters). 43 sorties were applied against
an area of approximately 12 square kilometers, dropping approximately
900 tons of ordnance. As a result of this effort, the existence of ;
the target complex was confirmed by the uncovering of over 100 buildings

3 33° - i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
