Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of organizing the military and paremilitery forces of South Vietnam into
an effective combination. Only through a single chain of command could
ARVN be freed to take the offensive, the CG be built up to cope with
local guerrillas, and the GVN place itself in a position to start devel~
oping useful intelligence -~ a field which was judged to have been, thus
far, a notable feilure. 23/

THE SUPPORTING OPERATTONAT, PLAN

The Geographically Phased National Plan laid out the priority areas
for this coordinated effort under a single chain of command. A three
phase sequence of actions (preparation, military action to clear and
secure, and combined action to establish civilian political control and
consolidate intelligence and security programs) would take place, sequen~
tially, in each of these priority areas. The process would be repeated
in expanding spheres as successive areas became pacified. 2h/

Together these two American-generated and proposed plans constituted
@ comprehensive blueprint for GVN action to end the insurgency. Two
things common to each should be noted for the purposes of the present
inquiry. The first is the simple fact that each was U.S.-generated and
proposed. The proposals addressed President Diem's persistent fears of a
coup by asking him to ignore those fears. ‘The second point 16 het nesther
had anything to say about U.S. advisors. Hach was an attempt to give
advice, but neither recommended that the U.S. advisory effort in RVN be
expanded in scope, size, or content.

STABLLITY IN THE NUMBER OF U.S. ADVISORS

The number of military advisors had remained fairly level throughout
this transition period (roughly, 1959 to mid-1961). TERM had finally
been abolished but an approximately equal number of spaces was added to
MAAG Vietnam, increasing it from 342 to 685. 25/ The ICC agreed that
this increase was consistent with the limitations imposed by the Geneve
Accords. 26/ MAAG advisors had been authorized down to regimental level
but expressly forbidden to participate directly in combat operations or to
go near the South Vietnamese national boundary. 27/ ‘The U.8, had begun
to provide Special Forces teams to GVN in an effort to train Vietnamese
ranger companies in anti-guerrilla tactics, but this was regarded as a
temporary undertaking. 58] As late as Novenber 1961, the total U.S, mili-
tary strength in South Vietnam was only about 900 personnel. 29/ _Dis-~
cussions and arguments had been underway for some time, however, with
view toward increasing U.S. involvement in South Vietnam. ‘The nature of
this debate, which took place largely during 1961 and terminated in the
decisions at the end of that year to establish 4 "Limited partnership
with GVN, is important to an account of the U.S. advisory build-up. It
was in the shadow of opposing contentions about how to make the U.S.

Aste TOP SECRET - Sensitive
