Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

7

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

were not part of MAAG, they had also improved the orgenization of Viet-
namese logistical services and had launched an extensive logistical
training program. In addition, TERM relieved MAAG of logistical re-
sponsibilities, thus freeing MAAG personnel for trairing. 94/ There-
after, the MAAG training program "gained momentum." $5/

This momentum was in the direction of training and organizing the
VNA so that it would have its proper role in the overall defense of
Vietnem as had already been envisioned by the MAAG in 1955:

(1) The organization and missions of the National Army,
Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps all supplementary in assur-
ing adequate internal security for Free Vietnam. The National
Army retains overall responsibility for internal security in
accordance with its assigned mission. The development of the
Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps as supplementary internal
security egencies will, at nominal cost, provide for increased
internal security and simultaneously afford necessery relief
of army units for necessary combat training, thus greatly
increasing the potential of Free Vietnam to resist armed
agpression from without , coordinated with guerrilla and sub-
versive action from within.

(2) The Civil Guard will be responsible for (a) nation-
wide civil law enforcement except in those, cities having
municipal police, (b) supplementing the Army Territorial
Regiments in maintain internal security, and (c) serving as
an Operating agency for the Vietnamese Bureau of Investigation
in the collection of anti-subversive intelligence. The Civil
Guard will possess the necessary mobility to concentrate against
strong subversive actions, supplementing and lending breadth to
the Army Territorial Battalions.... :

_ (3) Neither the Army nor the Civil Guard will have the
necessary strength, dispersion or familiarity to provide neces~
sary protection for widely scattered and numerous (approximately
6,000) villages against subversive actions of Viet Minh cadres
and dissident sect personnel. The Self-Defense Corps, operating
with lO-men armed units in each village, would possess these
requirements to the degree necessary to ferret. out and eliminate
existent or potential subversive movements.... The Army and the
Self-Defense Corps will have the same command channels.... Close
coordination will exist between Self-Defense Corps units and the
Civil Guerd. on the lower levels. $6/

No concept for defending Free Vietnam could be clearer: the regular
army in command of (or in close coordination with) the irregulers who
will have the capability to free the army to fill en army role -- "to
resist armed. aggression from without." Unfortunately, however sound this

TOP SECRET = Sensitiv
20
