Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ot
5 DEPARTMENT OF STATE
_ FOR THE PRESS OCTOBER .17, 1950
No. 1066

In the course of conversations which have taken
place during .the last few days between Messrs. Dean C.
Acheson, Secretary of State: John W. Snyder, Secretary of
the Treasury; George C. Marshall, Secretary of Defense;
and William C. Foster, Economic Cooperation Administratior,
on behalf of the United States, and Messrs. Jules Moch,
Minister of Defense; and Maurice Petsche, Minister of
Finance, on behalf of France, a review has been made of
the United States contribution to the implementetion of
the French Rearmament Program within the framework of
the Nerth Atlantic Treaty Grganization. This review has
included the question of additional United States militery
aid to Indochina.

The United States Government has expressed the view
that a military effort of the general magnitude and
character planned by the French Government would be a
vital contribution to the defensive strength of the North
Atlantic area. Out of the sums eppropriated by the United ~-
States Congress under the Mutual Defense Assistance Act
for fiscal years 1950 and 1951, about $5 billions have
been earmarked for military equipment to be delivered to
the European members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organi-
zation. France has been assigned by far the largest
Single part of these amounts .

In addition, the United States Congress has ap-
propriated for military assistance in the F.r East
approximately one-half billion dollars. In view of the
importance of the operations in Indochina, the major
part of this sum is being used to provide military equipv-
ment, including. light bombers, for the armed forces both
of France and of the Associated States of Indochina.

This assistance will provide a very important par
of the equipment required by the forces contemplated oo
activation in 1951 in France and for current cperations
in Indochine. Deliveries of equipment are being expedited
and, wixh respect to-Indochina, e particularly high
priority has been essigned.

Moreover, the following agreement has been reached
during the talks with respect to production assistance:
