Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A minimum callup of Reserve units to replace deploying forces and
+o sustain and support them was justified, the Joint Chiefs stated, by
the following situation: :

"a, Army. The 82nd Airborne Division represents the only
readily deployable Army division in the CONUS-based active
strategic reserve. The impending reduction of this division by
one-third to meet approved deployments establishes an immediate
requirement for its prompt reconstitution which is possible only
by the callup of Reserve units. In order to replace the forces
deployed from the strategic reserve, to provide support units
+o meet anticipation requirements in I CTZ and to provide a
wider rotation base of requisite ranks and skills, it will be
necessary for the Army to call up two infantry brigade forces
of the Reserve components. This callup will total approximately
32,000 personnel, These two brigades should attain a combat-
ready and deployable status in 12 weeks following callup.

"5. Marine Corps.

"(1) The Marine Corps cannot sustain additional deployments
+o Southeast Asia under current personnel policies. Thus, the
force authorized for deployment must be replaced with a comparable
Reserve unit as soon as possible. The Reserve force required for
this purpose will consist of one Marine regiment, reinforcing
combat support and combat service support units, and one composite
Marine Air Group with one VYNA, one VMP, and two medium helicopter
squadrons (HMM).

"(2) The Reserve force will consist of approximately
12,000 personnel. It will provide the capability to deploy a
balanced, self-sustaining air/ground combat force in relief of
the lightly structured 27th Marines (Rein) and permit return
of the 27th Marine Regiment (Rein) to the training/rotation base
in CONUS/Hawaii. This exchange would commence as soon as the
Reserve unit becomes combat-ready (approximately 60 days after
callup) and must be completed not later than 120 days after
deployment of RLT-27.

"(3) It is envisioned that the Reserve forces will be.
redeployed to CONUS without replacement after 13 months in South
Vietnam. However, if this does not occur, it will be best to
deploy a relief brigade from the 4th Marine Division/wing team.
Alternately, an adequate rotation base in CONUS to sustain the
continued deployment’ can be created but to do so requires
extensions of terms of service and other personnel policy changes.

"(k) In addition, it must be recognized that the anticipated
proportionate increase in personnel losses will require an increase
in the end strength of the active forces to sustain these losses’.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
