Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnam in the next few months would severely hamper operations around
Hanoi and Haiphong in any event and the proposal did not, therefore,
constitute @ serious degradation of our military position. It was to

be understood that in the event of any major enemy initiative in the south,
either against Khe Sanh or the cities, the bombing would be resumed.
Further, Rusk did not want a major diplomatic effort mounted to start peace
talks. He preferred to let the action speak for itself and await Hanoi’s
reaction. Finally, he noted that the area still open to bombing would include
everything up to and including Vinh (just below 19”) and there would be no
limitations on attacks in that zone. 4a/ Clifford's views of the proposal
and its explanation do not appear in his note. It can be inferred, however,
that he endorsed the idea. In any case, by the middle of March the question
of a partial bombing halt became the dominant air war alternative under
consideration in meetings at State and Defense. It is possible that the
President had already indicated to Clifford and Rusk enough approval of the
idea to have focused the further deliberative efforts of his key advisors

on it.

On March 8, Bundy sent a TS-NODIS memo to CIA Director Helms
requesting a CIA evaluation of four different bombing options and troop
deployment packages, none of which, however, included even a partial bombing
halt. Indicating that he had consulted with Secretary Rusk and Walt Rostow
before making his request, he noted the CIA papers already discussed in this
study but expressed a need for one overall summary paper. The options he
wanted evaluated were:

A. An early announcement of reinforcements on the order
of 25,000 men, coupled with reserve calls and other measures
adequate to make another 75,000 men available for deployment
by the end of the year if required and later decided. The
bombing would be stepped up as the weather improved, and would
include some new targets, but would not include the mining of
Haiphong or major urban attacks in Hanoi and Haiphong.

B. A Similar announcement of immediate reinforcement
action, coupled with greater actions than in A to raise our
total force strength, making possible additional reinforce-
ments of roughly 175,000 men before the end of 1968. Bombing
program as in A.

C. Option A plus mining of Haiphong and/or significantly
intensified bombing of urban targets in Hanoi and Haiphong areas.

D. Option B plus an intensified bombing program and/or
mining of Haiphong. 42 :

In addition to an assessment of likely DRV reactions, he wanted to know

what could be expected from the Chinese and the Soviets under each option.
He also noted that, "at this stage, none of us knows what the timing of

181 f TOP SECRET - Sensitive
