Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"8, Two U.S. divisions can be placed in Indochina in
30 days, and an additional 5 divisions in the following 120
days. This could be accomplished without reducing U.S.
ground strength in the Far East to an unacceptable degree,
but the U.S. ability to meet its NATO commitment would be
seriously affected for a considerable period. The amount
of time required to place 12 divisions in Indochina would
depend upon the industrial and personnel mobilization
measures taken by the government..." 11/

i. Defense-JCS "Solution": Rectify French Deficiencies

Faced with estimates that U.S. air-naval action could not
turn the tide, and that U.S. ground forces of appropriate size would
impinge upon other commitments, DoD and the JCS took the position that
an alternative military solution existed within the reach of the French
which required no U.S. intervention. DoD argued that the three reasons
for France's deteriorating position were (1) lack of the will to win;
(2) reluctance to meet Indochinese demands for true independence;

(3) refusal to train indigenous personnel for military leadership.
Defense believed that premature U.S. involvement would therefore beg
the basic question of whether the U.S. was prepared to apply the
strongest pressure on France, primarily in the European context, to
attempt to force the French in Paris and in Indochina to take appropriate
measures to rectify these deficiencies. Only if these measures were
forthcoming, DoD held, should the U.S. seriously consider committing
ground forces in defense of the interests of France and the Associated
States. The net effect of the Defense-JCS position was to challenge
the notion that a quick U.S. military action in Indochina would be
either feasible or necessary.

3. The New Approach: "United Action”

At this juncture the Eisenhower Administration began giving
serious consideration to broadening any American military intervention
in Indochina by making it part of a collective venture along with its
European and Asian allies. Secretary of State Dulles in a speech on
March 29 warned the public of the alarming situation in Indochina and
called for “united action" -- without defining it further -- in these
words:

"Under the conditions of today, the imposition on
Southeast Asia of the political system of Communist Russia
and its Chinese Communist ally, by whatever means, would
be a grave threat to the whole free community. The United
States feels that the possibility should not be passively
accepted but should be met by united action. This might
involve serious risks. But these risks are far less than
those that will face us a few years from now if we dare
not be resolute today." 12/

B-11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
