Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

at Guam to the public announcement, during which only a handful of people
in Washington and Saigon knew what was going to happen. The delays were
caused by a combination of factors: Bunker's understandable desire to
spend some time on personal business before going to Saigon, the Presi-
dent's desire to have Bunker make the final anrouncement himself after

he had reached Saigon, the need to work out final details. Since the
President was the man who had pressed everyone else working on Vietnam

to greater and greater effort, and since he stood to lose the most from
loss of time, it is surprising that he was now willing to see two months
lost, with a tired and lame-duck Mission in Vietnam, waiting for the new
team in a highly apprehensive state, and confusion at the higher levels.
But for reasons which are not readily apparent, the President did not push
his new team, and it was not until May 13, 1967, that Bunker made his
announcement (which had been drafted by Komer):

"Since being appointed U.S. Ambassador to Vietnam I have
been giving a great deal of thought to how to organize most
effectively the U.S. Advisory role in support of the Vietnamese
government's Revolutionary Development effort. Like my prede-
cessor, I regard RD -- often termed pacification -- as close to
the heart of the matter in Vietnam.

“Support of Revolutionary Development has seemed to me and
my senior colleagues to be neither exclusively a civilian nor
exclusively a military function, but to be essentially civil-
military in character. It involves both the provision of con-
tinuous local security in the countryside -- necessarily a
primarily military task and the constructive programs conducted
by the Ministry of Revolutionary Development, largely through .
its 59-member RD teams. The government of Vietnam has recog-
nized the dual civil-military nature of the RD process by
assigning responsibility for its execution to the Corps/Region
Commanders and by deciding to assign the bulk of the regular
ARVN, @&8s well as the Regional and Popular forces, to provide
the indispensable security so that RD can proceed in the country-
side. As senior American official in Vietnam, I have coneluded
that the U.S. Advisory and supporting role in Revolutionary
Development can be made more effective by unifying its civil
and military aspects under a single management concept. Unified
management, a Single chain of command, and a more closely dove-
tailed advisory effort will in my opinion greatly improve U.S,
support of the vital RD program. Therefore, I am giving
General Westmoreland the responsibility for the performance of
our U.S. Mission field programs in support of pacification or
Revolutionary Development. To assist him in performing this
function, I am assigning Mr. Robert Komer to his headauarters
to be designated as a deputy to COMUSMACV with personal rank of
ambassador.

128
TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
