Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

To be an American in Saigon today is to have a gnawing
feeling that time is against us. Junior officers in all
services are able, zealous and effective within the limits of
their means. Their morale is sustained by the fact that they
know that they are doing their jobs well and that they will
not have to accept the responsibility for defeat. But near
the top, where responsibility is heavy and accountability real,
one can sense the inner doubts of men whose outward behavior
remains determined.

Interestingly, McGeorge Bundy saw the military situation as moder-
ately encouraging and the Vietnamese people still remarkably tough and
resilient, though the social and political fabric was stretched thin.
"Nevertheless," he warned, "...extremely unpleasant surprises are
increasingly possible--both political and military."

E. More Agonizing over Additional Pressures

In the face of these uniformly discouraging appraisals, both
Saigon and Washington continued their long debate over ways and means of
mounting new or more intensive pressures against the enemy--and most
notably over the desirability and likely effectiveness of reprisal strikes
and "Phase II operations" against the DRV. But enthusiasm for these
operations was far from boundless.

The intelligence community, for example, had expressed, ever
since May of 1964, very little confidence that such added pressures would
have much impact on Hanoi's course. The 9 October 1964 national estimate
considered probable communist reactions to "a systematic program of gradu-
ally intensifying us/evn fair] attacks against targets in the DRV...."
The estimate tended only very hesitantly to the judgment that such a program
of air attacks, if protracted, might "on balance" cause the DRV to stop its
military attacks in SVN, to press for a negotiated cease-fire in the South,
and to try to promote an international conference to pursue their ends,
expecting, however, to fight another day. State dissented from even this
ambivalent judgment, believing that the DRV would carry on the fight regard-
less of air attacks. 16/

In February 1965, they reiterated this hesitant view, again with
State dissenting:

If the United States vigorously continued in its attacks
and damaged some important economic or military assets, the
DRV...might decide to intensify the struggle, but...it seems
to us somewhat more likely that they would decide to make some
effort to secure a respite from US attack.... 17/

Te TOP SECRET - Sensitive
