Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This recommendation, essentially in line with that of McNaughton
and his staff in ISA, was to provide powerful ammunition for the group
pressing for a halt to the force increases and some stabilization of
the bombing in North Vietnam.

On 8 June, McNaughton dealt once again with the dispute between
the JCS and ISA over whether or not Course A as written into the DPM
did or did not, in fact, reflect the recommendations of the JCS. Colonel
Amos Wright of the Joint Staff had been queried by ISA as to why the
JCS had objected to the wording in the DPM which asserted that Course A
(or the addition of the 200,000 men) reflected JCS recommendations. ‘The
basis of the JCS objection, according to Colonel Wright, was first that
the JCS had not yet actually recommended that COMUSMACV and CINCPAC be
given the additional 100,000 men they requested for FY 69 and that the
DPM discussed, in connection with Course A,various "extreme actions"
especially ground actions that the JCS had not actually recommended.

ISA concluded, after this, that although the courses of action
included under Course A had not actually been recommended as a complete
package by the JCS. The DPM did not, or need not, say this. The Chiefs
had discussed these courses of action as ones that "might be required"
and had done so in close conjunction with increased force levels and
escalated attacks on North Vietnam that they had recommended. Under
these circumstances ISA felt justified to argue in the DPM that Course A
should be rejected because it could quite probably lead to the "extreme"
course of action flagged by the JCS even though the Chiefs had not actu-
ally recommended them. 38/

On 12 June, McNaughton submitted a draft memorandum for the Presi-
dent entitled "Alternative Military Actions Against North Vietnam" in
which he incorporated the views of State, CIA and the JCS. He analyzed
three major alternatives: Alternative A - the JCS proposal to expand
the present program to include mining of the ports and attacks on roads
and bridges closer to Hanoi and Haiphong; Alternative B - which would
continue the present level of attacks but generally restricted to the
neck of North Vietnam south of 20 degrees; and Alternative C - a refine-
ment of the then currently approved program. In the memorandum,
McNaughton (and later Vance) opposed the JCS program (Alternative A) on
grounds that it would neither substantially reduce the flow of men and
supplies to the South nor pressure Hanoi toward settlement; that it would
be costly in American lives and in domestic and world opinion, and that
it would run serious risks of enlarging the war into one with the Soviet
Union or China, leaving the United States a few months from now more
frustrated and with almost no choice but even further escalation. Refine-
ment of the present program (Alternative C) was also opposed on grounds
that it would involve most of the costs and some of the risks of Alter-
native A with less chance than Alternative A of interdicting supplies or
moving Hanoi toward settlement. Finally, McNaughton recommended concen-
tration of the bulk of the bombing efforts on infiltration routes south
of the 20th parallel (Alternative B) because this course would, in his

189 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
