Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

realign III and IV Corps boundaries to give added emphasis to the Delta
war), the combat situation continued to worsen. The tempo of VC attacks,
particularly in the Delta, increased; the weapons~loss ratio and casualty
ratios deteriorated; and GVN "missing in action" increased. 15/ In
Washington, further doubt was cast on the optimism of previous reports
by a controversial State Department research study of October 22. 16/
The memorandum took issue with encouraging conclusions about the progress
of the military campaign derived from statistical trends, pointing out
important unfavorable trends revealed by the same statistical data. In
Saigon, MACV continued unsuccessfully to press Diem to take further steps
to strengthen the war effort.

Meanwhile, the U.S. Mission had been feeling the impact of the new
policy in internal strains of its own. Hilsman reports that Lodge
decided early in October that the recall of John Richardson, the CTA
chief in Saigon, would be a useful additional pressure against Nhu because
they had been closely identified during Nolting's ambassadorship, and
because Richardson was known to favor a more conciliatory approach to
the regime. 17/ While there are no cables in the available files to
confirm it, Hilsman maintains thet Lodge sent a private message to the
President and CIA Director MeCone requesting Richardson's transfer. The
President agreed, MeCone acquiesced, and Richardson was returned to
Washington on October 5. Whatever other motives may have been involved,
Richerdson had, in fact, been the specific object of an attack in the
U.S. press on October 2 that had accused him of insubordination and had
compromised his identity. 18/ It is not surprising under such circum-
stances that he should have been transferred. Whatever the case, the
press interpreted his recall es a slap at the regime, as Hilsman suggests
Lodge wanted.

This was only an incident in the continuing series of stories by U.S.
correspondents on divisions within the mission. Lodge's relations with
the press, however, remained excellent throughout his tour. He con-
sciously cultivated the U.S. press corps with private luncheons,
"backgrounders," and occasional leaks, and it paid off for him personally.
But the.press sharply attacked those in the mission, like Richardson and
Harkins, with whom they disagreed about U.S. policy. Washington regis-
tered its concern that these stories, whatever their origin, were damag-
ing to the official posture of unity the U.S. Government was trying to
maintain in the implementation of a difficult policy toward South Vietnam.19/
But the stories continued, even after the coup. ; a

In his weekly evaluation of the impact of the new U.S. policy on
October 23, Lodge was not encouraged by the results to date. "Diem/Nhu
give every appearance of sitting tight and reacting to U.S. pressure with
counter pressure and implying through public statements that they can go
it alone." 20/ Nevertheless, there were several straws in the wind.
Secretary Thuan had reported that Diem was worried and that he had in-
structed Thuan to ask Lodge if Washington had reached any decisions on

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
