Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

- TOP SECRET

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
aired Washington 25, De. Ce

28 November 1950

AT Lar! rbd Q THEN SH
EMEA 265 Tris SECRETARY OF DEFENSE:

ressible Future Action in Indochina

3
eS

| "; accordance with the request contained in your memorandum,
er 1950, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have studied the

ement or U. S. Policy on Indochina for NSC Considera-
you enclosed, in the light of the message enclosed here-
with (faciosure "A") from Brigadier General F. G. Brink (USA), Chief,
M\ytaryy Acsistance Advisory Group, Indochina. You will recall that
tne Yoint Caiefs of Staff withheld final comment on the subject draft
policy statement until the Brink report was received,

| age

2. ithe Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the statement of
United States policy proposed by the Southeast Asia Aid Policy Com-
wittee: conforms generally to their previously expressed views, in-
elwdiva tiase contained in their memorandum to you on Indochina dated
[2 Octéber 1950, They are of the opinion, however, that the draft
statement of United States policy on Indochina proposed by the South-
easr ASia Aid Policy Committee should be recast so as to meet more
effectively the immediate and critical situation in that country,
accordingly, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have formulated the following
statement of short-term and long-term policies which they recommend
he subtiituted for those included in the paper prepared by the South-
East Asta Azld Policy Committee.

- ine Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that the military prob-
\evns % -ndechina are closely interrelated with the political prob-
\@ms Of the area, Accordingly, many of the policies recommended
\erein hie largely. in the political field, The Joint Chiefs of Staff
tonsi der, “Cwever, that the fundamental causes of the deterioration

Penne Indochinese security situation lie in the lack of will and de-
ywaextoa on the part of the indigenous people of Indochina to join

pale Martecly with the French in resisting communism. The Joint

rns yeaah { consider that, without popular support of the Indo-
WMes® peozle, the French will never achieve a favorable long-range

val TDA ent 2 = .-
Wat j ‘Settlement of the security prcblem of Indochina.

oy iD Fy

The

deve Oint Chiefs of Staff recommend the following short-term

Tor Indochina:

si ; TOP SECRET
