$7.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

What happened, I believe, was this: the leaders visited
want -- as long as they can -- to remain as friends or allies
of the United States. The public, or, more precisely, the
political, reaction to Laos had drastically weakened the
ability to maintain any strongly pro-US orientation. Neu-
tralism in Thailand, collapse in Vietnam, anti-American election
demagoguery in the Philivpines were all developing prior to our

visit. The show of strength and sincerity -- pertly because
you had sent the Vice President and partly, to a greater extent
then you may believe, because you had sent your sister -- gave

the friendly leaders something to "hang their hats on” for a
while longer.

Our mission arrested the decline of confidence in the United
States. It did not -- in my judgment -- restore any confidence
already lost. The leaders were as explicit, as courteous and
courtly as men could “be in making it clear that deeds must follow
words -- soon.

We didn't buy time -- we were given it. :

If these men I saw at your request were bankers, I would
know == without bothering. to ask -- that there would be no
further extensions on my note,

% * % %
The Importance of Follow-Through

T cannot stress too strongly the extreme importance of
following up this mission with other measures, other actions,
and other efforts. At the moment -- because of Laos -- these
nations are hypersensitive to the possibility of American
hypocrisy toward Asia. Considering the Vienna talks with
Khrushchev -~ which, to the Asian mind, emphasize Western rather
then Asian concerns -- and considering the negative line of
various domestic American editorials about this mission, I
strongly believe it is of first importance that this trip bear
fruit immediately.

Personal Conclusions from the Mission

I took to Southeast Asia some basic convictions about the
problems faced there. I have come away Zrom the mission there
-- and to India and Pakistan -- with many of those convictions
sharpened and deepened by what I saw and learned. I have also
reached certain other conelusions which I believe may be of
value as guidance for those responsible in formulating policies.

sh

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
