Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"I agree that civilian lines of command within U.S.
agencies dealing with Revolutionary Development should be
eonsolidated under Ambassador Porter. He should take unto
himself the direct operation of the five categories of man- °
power now in the field. I refer to USAID public safety,
USAID province reps; JUSPAO; CIA and the civil functions
performed by the military advisers. They would all stay
exactly where they are as far as rationing, housing and
administration is concerned. Porter would have the opera-
tional authority and responsibility. ?

"I am not clear what another Deputy Ambassador would
do and advise against such an unnecessary and unwieldy struc-
ture. Ambassador Porter does not now absorb ‘substantial
other responsibilities’ which distract his attention from
revolutionary development. Administrative matters involving
the U.S. Mission as a whole are handled by the Mission Co-
ordinator, and political affairs are handled by me with close
support from the political counselor. Economic affairs, in
which Porter as the man responsible for revolutionary develop-
ment is intimately and necessarily involved,. are well covered
by AID and the Economic Counselor. Public affairs not con-
nected with field operations associated with revolutionary
development are well in hand and do not teke Ambassador Porter's
time.

"The only 'substantiel other responsibility’ which Porter
carries outside of RD, is to take charge in my absence. I
See no need, and would find it most inappropriate, for this
to be changed.

"I think there is great merit in the idea of having 4
high-ranking military man involved in pacification work.
He should be in charge of all the military aspects of paci-
fication -- working with ARVN and selecting, expediting, and
assigning the U.S. troops who would operate as suggested in
pare 3 above. He should be an officer with proper knowledge
of and talent for the subject and I, of course, think of
General Weyand. If the decision is made by all hands to
put the military into pacification @s suggested. in para 3,
the decision as to where to place such a general. should not
be too difficult.

"I agree that careful definition and @lineation of re-
sponsibilities of the U.S. civilian and military sides is
necessary. We intend that the two efforts fully mesh.

"Clearly there is very little that can be done economically,
socially, psychologically, and politically for the "hearts and
minds' of men, if these men have knives sticking into their
collective bellies. The knife must first be removed. It is

110
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
