Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

4

We heve noted your /recent cables/ but do not yet have
your appreciation of the political effect in Saigon of acting
around Buddha's birthday. From my point of view it is a
great advantage to use Buddha's birthdey to mask the first
days of the pause here, if it is at all possible in political
terms for Quat. I assume we could undertake to enlist the
Archbishop and the Nuncio in calming the Catholics.

You should understand that my purpose in this plan is to
begin to clear a path either toward restoration of peace or
toward increased military action, depending upon the reaction
of the Communists. We have amply demonstrated our determina-
tion and our commitment in the last two months, and I now
wish to gain some flexibility.

I know thet this is a hard assignment on short notice, but
there is no one who can bring it off better.

I have kent this plan in the tightest possible circle here
and wish you to inform no one but Alexis Johnson, After I have
your report of Quat's reaction I will make 4 final decision and
it will be communicated promptly to senior officers concerned.

Ambassador Taylor promotly relayed the President's plan to Quat,
whose major objection was to the notion of linking the pause in any way
with Buddha's birthday. Taylor reyorted this objection to Washington
leks/ and received the following additional instructions from the
Department in return. 125/

We have decided here to go ahead commencing on Thursday
[Mey 13/ for period of approximately 5 - 7 days- Orders through
military channels will place stand-down on basis "in order to
observe reaction of DRV rail and road transportation systems"
and will order increase in photo recce of DRV and bombing within
SVN. You should tell Westmorelend true basis for his personal
use only so that you and he and Alex Johnson remain the only
three Americans in Saigon aboard. We have informed Dobrynin
tonight and ere instructing Kohler to convey message to Hanoi
through DRV Ambassador in Moscow. I will also be telling
British and Canadian Foreign Ministers personally tomorrow and
we will convey message to Menzies through Embassy here. How-
ever, each of these being informed only at highest levels and
their Saigon representatives will not repeat not be witting.

You should take following actions:
1. Inform Quat we are going ahead. You should not specify

period but let us know if he raises question or still insists
on as-short a period as  - 5 days. Tell him we will definitely

hah TOP SECRET - Sensitive
