25.

26.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The next day, June 2, the President directly confronted Dulles
on this matter. Dulles distinguished between U.S. involvement in
a collective grouping, which could only come about on satisfaction
of the preconditions, and action in response to overt Chinese
ageression. The Secretary's view was that in the latter case, the
U.S. should act unilaterally upon authorization by Congress, citing
prior statements by himself and the President that had warned China
of the consequences of overt aggression. The President responded,
according to Cutler's report, that direct Chinese aggression would
force him to go all the way with naval and air power (including
"new weapons") directed at air bases and ports in mainland China. He
would therefore have to have much more than Congressional authoriza-
tion in view of the likely public reaction to a Presidential request
of Congress for war acts against China. Even though the Thais,
Filipinos, French, and Indochinese would likely support such action,
other countries, such as Australia, had to be brought along as well.
The President, in short, was as concerned about the politics as the
logic of getting involved in a conflict with China. (Memorandum
of conference in the President's office, June 2, 1954, involving the
President, Dulles, Anderson, Radford, MacArthur, and Cutler, TOP
SECRET.) At its 200th meeting on 3 June, the NSC received, considered,

and agreed upon the President's views.

Following this important Presidential determination, Dulles called
in the Australian and New Zealand ambassadors on the question of
overt Chinese aggression in Southeast Asia. He explained that direct
Chinese action was unlikely, but that the French had been pressing
for assurance of a U.S. reply to Chinese air intervention in the delta.
He reported the U.S. position that Chinese aggression required a collec-
tive response and a UN appeal, and distinguished this procedure from the
united action concept of March 29. A brief memorandum was suggested by
the Secretary by which the ANZUS powers would pledge, in the event of
overt CPR aggression, to request approval of their parliaments for the
use of armed forces, support a UN appeal by the attacked party, and
seek to persuade other free nations to join in acting against China.
The ambassadors, however, merely asked questions and, apparently, the
proposed memorandum was not agreed. upon by any of the Allies during
the course of the Geneva Conference. See Dulles priority tel. to
American Embassy - Canberra No. 238, June 5, 1954 (TOP SECRET).

Memorandum from Bidault to Eisenhower, Geneva, June 1, 1954 (TOP
SECRET). See also Smith from Geneva tel. DULTE 156, June 6, 1954
(TOP SECRET).

Dillon tel. to Dulles No. 4766, June 9, 1954 (TOP SECRET). Also,
Dulles tel. to American Embassy - Paris No. 4286, May 27, 1954 (TOP
SECRET); here, the American position was that French forces would
be maintained during united action except for normal troop rotation,
replacement by native forces as the military situation permits, and
consultation with allies engaged in the united action.

A-30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
