Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Asked when, in his opinion, the Chinese would get out of Indochina,
General Gallagher said that General Iu Han /nad told him the

7/ Commanding General of Chinese armed forces in Indochina.

Chinese would move out when the job given them by the Allies was completed,
General Gallagher said he thought they really intend to do this although
the whole matter depends upon the removal of the Japanese, To date,
shipping for this purpose has not been available but now it is understood
that United States bottoms will be used. The question is, therefore, when
will such ships be a General Gallagher said he had recommended
to Genéral Wedemeyer 2/that high priority should be given such allocation.

Lt. Gen, Albert C. Wedemeyer, Commanding General, U.S. Forces,
China Theater, and concurrently Chief of Staff, China Theater.

There are some 20 to 30 thousand Japanese in Haiphong and the Do Son Peninsula.
No political settlement. can be reached in Indochina until the Chinese move

out and they cannot do that until the Japanese are repatriated. General
Gallagher added that he thought US army teams would have to be put into
Indochina to concentrate and prepare the Japanese for evacuation.

General Gallagher was asked whether he knew of any arrangement whereby
French forces moving into the north would overlap departing Chinese forces.
He replied that in December Sainteny 9/said that no French would enter unbil

9/ Jean Sainteny, French Commissioner of Tonkin and North Annam.

the Chinese left. General Gallagher thought the French were probably not get-
ting very far in negotiating with the Chinese on problems connected with

their removal. Unless in the meantime something has been arranged between
the French and the Chinese, the French would probably infiltrate overland from
the south rather than land in force in northern ports.

General Gallagher pointed out that little love was lost between the
Chinese and the French; that the presence of the American group in Hanoi re-
strained anti-French Chinese action; and that he himself had influenced
General Iu Han to bring Sainteny and Ho Chi. Minh together and confront both
with a strong directive that order must be maintained. The existence of a
vacuum in the north with neither French nor Chinese troops present would be
extremely dangerous, as the Annamese would react strongly against all French
in the area, wno would be helpless in protecting themselves, To take over
successfully, the French would need a sufficient force to cover the whole
north, One or two modern French divisions could, in General Gallagher's
opinion, defeat the Annamese.

In response to the question whether the French could do more than take
key cities, he admitted that the Annamese would take to the hills and con-
time guerrilla warfare. Even in Saigon, he pointed out, things are far from
peaceful despite British and French claims to the contrary. Establishment of
French control could be speeded up if they were able to make large-scale air
drops throughout the north. The Annamese, however, are well organized and,
so far as small arms go, are quite well armed, although they have no navy,
shore batteries and probably little artillery.

5h
