1K.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Iv. B. 4. PHASED WITHDRAWAL OF U.S. FORCES
INTRODUCTION ‘

From mid-1962 to early 196) the U.S. government went through a formal
planning process, ostensibly designed to disengage the U.S. from direct and
large-scale military involvement in Vietnam. In retrospect, this experi-
ence falls into place as a more or less isolated episode of secondary im-
portance; eventually abortive, it had little impact on the evolution of the
Vietnam war. It does, however, serve as a vehicle for understanding one
long phase of the war and the U.S, role in it.

The genesis lay in a conjuncture of circumstances during the first
half of 1962 that prompted the U.S. to shift its Vietnam perspective
from the hitherto restricted one of largely tactical responses to current,
localized, and situational requirements, to fitting these to more strate-
gic and purposeful long-range courses of action. The expanded perspective
was programmatic in outlook, and oriented toward specific goals -- end
the insurgency and withdraw militarily from Vietnam.

At the outset, the motivation for the idea of phased withdrawal of
U.S. forces was threefold: in part, the belief that developments in Viet-
nan itself were going well; in part, doubt over the efficacy of using U.S.
forces in an internal war; and in part, the demands of other crises in the
world that were more important to Washington than Vietnam. In the course
of materializing into policy and assuming form as plans, these premises were
transformed into conclusions, desiderata institutionalized as objectives,
and wish took on the character and force of imperative.

For example, in March 1962, Secretary McNamara testified before Con-
gress that he was "optimistic" over prospects for U.S. success in aiding .
Vietnam, and “encouraged at the progress the South Vietnamese are making.

He expressed conviction that the U.S. would attain its objectives there.
But he emphasized that the U.S. strategy was to avoid participating directly
in the war while seeking an early military conclusion: 1

"I would say definitely we are approaching it from the
point of view of trying to clean it up, and terminating sub-
version, covert aggression, and combat operations....

"_..We are wise to carry on the operations against the

Communists in that area by assisting native forces rather than
by using U.S. forces for combat.

ie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
