Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

flagrant violation of the Geneva Accords would endanger the credibility
of our political stance in Iaos. 103/ Subsequent to the meeting, the
Vientiane Embassy removed a reservation expressed earlier and cleared
the way for company-size penetrations of up to 20 km along Route 9, near
Tchepone. 104/ At the conference this operation was considered of high
priority with respect to infiltration traffic into South Vietnam.

The mission representatives agreed that, once the operations
began, they should not be acknowledged publicly. In effect, then, they
would supplement the other covert pressures being exerted against North
Vietnam. Moreover, while the Lao Government would of course know about
the operations of their T-28s, Souvanna was not to be informed of the
GvN/U.S. Operations. The unacknowledged nature of these operations would
thus be easier to maintain. Accordingly, the representatives recommended
to Washington that Vientiane be authorized to approach the Laotian Govern-
ment regarding initiation of T-28 operations. On the other hand, the
Administration was asked to approve ground operations in three specified
areas of the Panhandle. 105/

Over two weeks passed before these recommendations were acted on.
In the meantime, the JCS also submitted proposals for implementing NSAM 31},
requesting immediate authority to implement air operations in the Panhandle.
Endorsing the main theme of the mission representatives, they called for
combined action by RLAF T-28s and U.S. aircraft which would provide "sup-
pressive fire" and attack heavily defended bridges. The JCS also sought
authority to initiate GvN ground intelligence collection and target recon-
naissance patrols in the Iaotian corridor. 106

On 6 October, authority was given the Vientiane Enbassy to urge
the Laotian Government to begin 1-28 air strikes "as soon as possible."
The RLAF targets were to be selected from a previously coordinated 22-
target list, a few of which were designed for U.S. YANKEE TEAM strikes,
but they were to exclude Mu Gia Pass. The latter mission was known to
require U.S. escort and suppressive fire, and a decision on whether to
authorize such U.S. operations had not yet been made in Washington. More-
over, neither had the Administration authorized YANKEE TEAM strike missions
against the tougher Panhandle targets. 107/

Administration rationale on the issue of U.S. participation in
the Panhandle air strikes is not clear from the sources available to this
writer. Contemporary intelligence estimates indicated the communist
responses were likely to be limited to (1) increases in antiaircraft deploy-
ments in the area, (2) propaganda attacks and (3) possible sabotage of U.S./
GVN supporting bases. 108, However, Washington's viewpoint on another
laotian request for air support may be significant. With respect to air
strikes against targets along Route 7, in support of the RLG campaign to
consolidate its holdings west of the Plaine des Jarres, Administration
rationale was-as follows:

"Since we wish to avoid the impression that we are
taking /the/ first step in escalation, we face] inclined

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
