Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(French Annam below the 17th parallel) and the 'Nambo' (Cochin
China), with each area under Hanoi's direct control. In late
1960 or early 1961, this arrangement was scrapped and field
control over all aspects of the Viet Cong insurgency vested in
a still existing, single command headquarters, originally
known as the Central Office for South Viet Nam (or C.0.S.V.N.
~-a term still in circulation) but now usually referred to by
captured Viet Cong as simply the P.R.P.'s Central Committee.
This command entity, which also contains the headquarters of the
N.L.F., is a mobile and sometimes peripatetic body, usually
located in the extreme northwestern tip of Tay Ninh province
in prudent proximity to the Cambodian border. . . At the 1962
Geneva Conference on laos, a member of the North Vietnamese
delegation inadvertently commented that the published roster of
the Lao Dong Party's Central Committee did not include some
members whose identities were kept secret because they were
‘directing military operations in South Viet Nam.' One of the
four examples he cited was 'Nguyen Van Cuc,' which is one of
the aliases used by the Chairman of the P.R-P. This Lao

Dong Central Committee member, whose true name we do not

know, is probably the overall field director of the Viet Cong
insurgency in South Viet Nam. The overall commander of Viet
Cong military forces (who would be a subordinate of Cuc's
within the Communist command structure) is almost certainly
the Chairman of the (P.R.P.) Central Comittee's Military
Committee--a man who uses the name Tran Nam Trung but whom
several captured Viet Cong cadre members have insisted is
actually Lieutenant-General Tran Van Tra, a Deputy Chief of
Staff of the North Vietnamese army and an alternate member

of the lao Dong Central Committee. The director of all Viet
Cong activity in V.C. Military Region 5 (the northernmost
third of South Viet Nam) is Nguyen Don, a Major-General in

the North Vietnamese army and another alternate member of the
Iao Dong Central Committee, who in 1961 was commander of the
North Vietnamese 305th Division but came south late that year
or early in 1962. In short, not only does the P.R.P. control
all aspects of the Viet Cong movement, including the N.L.F.,
and not only is it a subordinate echelon of the North Viet~-
namese Lao Dong Party, but the P.R.P.'s own leaders appear to
be individuals who themselves occupy ranking positions within
the Lao Dong Party hierarchy." 1438/

However, while the fact of extensive DRV control over South Vietnam's
insurgents after 1960 sheds light on recent DRV policy, it does not
answer the questions of when and why that control was imposed. These
are best addressed in the broad context of world events, which, as
much as DRV domestic politics, or U.S. and GVN policies, seem to have
governed DRV strategy.

Mh TOP: SECRET - Sensitive
