Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

pee
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At the time of the Task Force review, it will be recalled, Defense
recommended sending two 1600-man combat units to Vietnam to set up two
training centers for the Vietnamese in the highlands. In later drafts
of the Task Force report, this proposal was broadened to consider send-
ing American troops for wider purposes, short of direct combat against
the Viet Cong. But the proposal was downgraded to a subject for study
and was no longer a definite recommendation.

Here is a summary of the items (on the issue of U.S. combat troops)
in the record available to this study following Kennedy's decisions on
the Task Force Report (May 11).

On May 12 Vice President Johnson discussed the question with Diem,
as described in an earlier section. This seems to have resolved the
issue (negatively) so far as Johnson was concerned, and possibly as far as
President Kennedy. was concerned. But if it did, the President's view was
not very emphatically passed on to subordinate members of the Administration.
For a week later, Lansdale sent: a memo to Gilpatric noting that Diem did not
want U.S. combat units as such, but that. he might accept these units if they
had a mission of training South Vietnamese forces:

Ambassador Nolting [said] that President Diem would
welcome as many U.S, military personnel as needed for
training and advising Vietnamese forces, /MAAS Chier/
General McGarr, who was also present at this discussion
/petween Johnson and Dien/, reported that while President
Diem would not want U.S. combat forces for the purpose
of fighting Communists in South Vietnam, he would accept
deployment of U.S, combat forces as trainers for the
Vietnamese forces at any time. 8/

This language leaves it unclear whether McGarr was merely stating
his opinion (which supported his own desire to bring in U.S. combat
units), or reporting what he understood Diem to have said.

(About the same day of Lansdale's memo--May 18--the
JCS had restated its recommendation of May 10 that combat
troops should be sent to Vietnam; and McGarr, from Saigon,
had recommended sending a 16,000 man force, or if Diem
would not accept that, a 10, 600 man force with the nomi-
nal mission of establishing training centers for the Viet-
namese, The similar recommendation made in the Task Force
drafts had suggested 3200 men for the force.) s)

In any event, Lansdale's memo makes it quite clear that he (along
with McGarr and the JCS) were primarily interested in getting U.S.
combat units into Vietnam, with the training mission a possible device
for getting Diem to accept them, After a discussion of JCS and CINCPAC
planning and of alternative locations for the troops, Lansdale comments:

65
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
