Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

well-founded, at least insofar as Churchill's strategic thought was con-
cerned. The Prime Minister was evidently as unwilling to invite an active
American role in the liberation of Southeast Asia as the U.S. was to
undertake same; as early as February, 1944, Churchill wrote that:

"A decision to act as a subsidiary force under the
Americans in the Pacific raises difficult political ques-
tions about the future of our Malayan possessions. If the
Japanese should withdraw from them or make peace as the
result of the main American thrust, the United States
Government would after the victory feel greatly strengthened
in its view that all possessions in the East Indian Archi-
pelago should be placed under some international body upon
which the United States would exercise a decisive concern." v

The future of Commonwealth territories in Southeast Asia stimulated
intense British interest in American intentions for French colonies there.
In November and December of 1944, the British expressed to the United
States, both in London and in Washington, their concern "that the United
. States apparently has not yet determined upon its policy toward Indo-
china." 8/ The head of the Far Eastern Department in the British
Foreign Office told the U.S. Ambassador that:

"Tt would be difficult to deny French participation in the
liberation of Indochina in light of the increasing strength of
the French Government in world affairs, and that, unless a
policy to be followed toward Indochina is mutually agreed be-
tween our two governments, circumstances may arise at any
moment which will place our two governments in a very awkward
situation." 9/

President Roosevelt, however, refused to define his position further,
notifying Secretary of State Stettinius on January 1, 1945:

"J still do not want to get mixed up in any Indo-China
decision. It is a matter for postwar.--...I do nob want to Ly
get mixed up in any military effort toward the liberation of
Indo-China from the Japanese.--You can tell Halifax that I
made this very clear to Mr. Churchill. From both the military
and civil point of view, action at this time is premature."10/

However, the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff were concurrently planning
the removal of American armed forces from Southeast Asia. In response
to approaches from French and Dutch officials requesting aid in expelling
Japan from their former colonial territories, the U.S. informed them that:

"All our available forces were committed to fighting
the Japanese elsewhere in the Pacific, and Indochina and
the East Indies were therefore not included within the
sphere of interest of the American Chiefs of Staff." 11/

When the Combined Chiefs of Staff met at Malta at the end of January, 1945,

A-15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
