Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and Press relations to be assigned to him personally and to have offices
in "a convenient villa...We Vietnamese want the Americans to be responsi-
ble with us and not merely as advisors." This request revived the "brain
trust" concept discussed with the Minh government around the first of the
year. Commenting, Lodge noted that he had opposed pushing Americans into
GVN because of Colonialist overtones; they wovld cause resentment, and

a lessening of effort by the GVN, placing the blame on the U.8. ‘There-
fore, he had avoided raising the idea with Khanh. However, that Khanh
himself now proposed it removed that objection, and Lodge felt that the
U.S, showld respond because it was an urgent necessity.

late in the same meeting, Lodge told Khanh of a State Department
propesal for civil administrators on a crash basis in partially pacified
areas. His quick reply, "Yes...if you will accept losses."

Lodge recommended a Civil Administrative advisor to join the three
others mentioned above, but he advised against more. He said there was
no sense dumping several hundred advisors out there. “In view of the "trail-
blazing" nature of the move, he requested a member of the White House staff,
possibly Forrestal, to come out for a conference. 60/ Ordinarily, it
would be surprising that Lodge would make such a big issue of Khanh's re-
vival of an idea that GVN had already advanced through Lodge and that the
President himself had approved. However, his effusive reaction in this
case merely underlines his oft-repeated reluctance to push GVN, Lodge
presented the first three advisors to Khanh on May 6. 61/

On April 30, ledge, Westmoreland, and USOM Director Brent met
with several top members of GYN to discuss GVN's failure to disburse operat-
ing funds to the provinces, sectors and divisions and to correct the man-
power shortage in ARVN and the paramilitary units. Lodge argued that the
McNamara, program was failing, not because U.S, support lagged, but because
the necessary piaster support was missing. Moreover, he said, there was
no shortage of piasters available to GVN. In reply, Oanh of the GVN said
they had inherited a bad system from the French, and that he was now trying
to implement new procedures. Khanh replied on the manpower problem that
to raise the strength would require an ultimatum to the Corps Commanders,
put then he also said that remedial moves were underway and were known to
MACV. Khanh countered the budgetary argument by saying that he had still
not received money from the U.S. to support increased pay for the para-
military; Lodge replied that if he went ahead with the increased pay, the
U.S. would meet the bill. Overall, the meeting was one of thrust and
parry rather than of consultation. 62/ This meeting followed prodding
from McNamara and JCS in a cable sent April 29. 63/

On May 4, Khanh told Lodge he wanted to declare war, bomb North
Vietnam with U.S. bombers, put the country on a war footing, including
"setting rid of the so-called politicians and having...a government of
technicians," and bring in 10,000 U.S. Army special forces to “cover the

whole Cambodian-laotian frontier." Lodge was non-committal on U.S, forces,

but said that the war came first and that democratic forms could wait. 64
However, Khanh publicly called for an election by October of a Constitutional.
Assembly, apparently to bolster his public support; he had his share of
rumors and political infighting. 65/ °

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
