Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Meanwhile, back in Washington, by the time the NSC met on Monday
morning, August 26, misgivings about supporting @ cowp «+ che policy owt-
lined in State's August 2) message -- had developed. Hilsman's account
credits McNamara, Taylor, and MeCone with second thoughts. 38/ Whatever
the outcome of Monday's meeting, another was held the next day, after
which Lodge was cabled for more details about the coup plans, and an
assessment of their chances of success. 39/ Reflecting the reservations
in Washington, the message asked what effect delaying the coup would
have.

Replying the following day, Lodge gave a favorable assessment of
coup prospects; expressed confidence in the generals who were to lead
it, especially Minh, Khanh, and Kim; and argued, "that chances of
success would be diminished by delay." 40/ A cable from Harkins to
Taylor on the seme day is the first documentary indication of Harkins!
reseryations about supporting the coup attempt. Cryptically, Harkins
indicated that he would offer his full support to the Ambassador in
implementing State's instructions, but noted that, "Reference b. (CINCPAC
2504562 Aug 1963) advises me that reference a. (State 243) embodies
CINCPAC opinion and that my support had been volunteered." 41/ He would
have preferred one last attempt to persuade Diem to dispense with Nhu.
Furthermore, the line-up of forces did not indicate a clear-cut advantage
for the coup plotters, Therefore, he stated, "In my opinion as things
stand now I don't believe there is sufficient reason for a crash approval
on our part at this time." 42/ He also had concluded that the coup would
not take place until we gave the word. In a separate message, Richardson,
however, described the situation as having “reached the point of no
return," 43/ Further, he concluded, "Unless the generals are neutralized
before being able to launch their operation, we believe they will act and
that they have good chance to win.” 4h/

In Washington, State and Defense were divided on the issue. Nolting,
who was regularly attending the daily NSC meetings at the President's
request, sided with the Pentagon in the view that prospects for the coup
were not good, and that another effort should be made with Diem. Hilsman,
Harriman, and Ball were convinced the U.S. had to get on with the coup,
since Diem offered no prospect of complying the U.S. wishes, 45/ The
discussions in the NSC, reportedly, were increasingly heated and testy. 46/
The division of opinion between Harkins and Lodge concerned the Presidert
and upon receipt of their respective messages on August 28, he cabled
each of them separately for their "independent judgment" about the
prospects for a coup and their personal advice on the course the U.S.
should pursue, The President was at pains to reiterate his great con-
fidence in both men, and to assure them that differences of opinion in
Washington would not prevent the U.S. goverment from acting as a unit
under his direction. 47/ In a separate message, State asked Lodge to
indicate the latest point at which the operation could be suspended,
and with what consequences; since U.S. prestige would be engaged in the
venture, the message stated, once the coup were under way, it had to
succeed, 48/ Lodge was also asked what actions the U.S. might take to
promote the coup.

19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
