Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

unification had been postponed by only two years, or whether they felt
that partition, even with the resultant risk of renewed military con-
frontation was, in reality, the best and only solution that the conflict-
ing aims and pressures at Geneva could provide. The British, like the
Russians, thought partition achieved their goal of re-establishing a
stability, however precarious, in Southeast Asia. The Chinese did not
gain as extensive a buffer zone as they had sought, but probably were
satisfied to see the territorial establishment of the DRV; they could

not (at that time) have been seriously concerned over a future threat
from South Vietnam, since the Accords ruled out an extensive U.S. military
presence there. The U.S. viewed the loss of North Vietnam as a political
disaster, and immediately set about making treaty arrangements to prevent
the loss of more Asian territory to Communism; but the U.S. was willing to
accept partition as all that could be salvaged from a bad military situa-
tion. The Southeast Asia policy of the U.S. in the aftermath of the

’ Geneva Conference was focused on organizing free Asian states against
further inroads of Communism. The two Vietnams faced each other across

a demilitarized zone. The DRV, manipulating a Viet Minh infrastructure
in the South, waited for the elections, or for voracious political forces
in the South to plunge the Saigon Government into chaos before election
time arrived. South Vietnam began its attempt to establish complete con-
trol over its own countryside, and constantly decried the DRV's undemo-
eratic handling of would-be migrants.

ec. Official Positions are in Agreement

On the surface, however, the parties to the Geneva Accords
-- with exception of the South Vietnamese Government -- officially sub-
scribed to the view that partition was, as the Final Declaration stated,
only temporary. Moreover, and again with the GVN the exception, all the
parties concluded that partition was the only realistic way to separate
the combatants, meet the widely divergent military and political demands
of the French and Viet Minh, and conclude an armistice.

d. The Outcome Could Have Been Predicted

But such assertions did not affect the practical import of
the Geneva documents. By creating two regimes responsible for "civil
administration" (Article l4.a. of the Vietnam Armistice Agreement), by
providing for the regroupment of forces to two zones and for the move-
ment of persons to the zone of their choice, and by putting off national
elections for two years, the conferees, whatever their intentions, made
a future political settlement for Vietnam unlikely. The separation of
Vietnam at the 17th parallel was designed to facilitate the armistice,
put in fact it also facilitated the development of two governments under
inimical political philosophies, foreign policies, and socio-economic
systems. Thus, reunification through elections remained as remote
in Vietnam as in Korea or Germany. "Elections," as Victor Bater has

D-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
