Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"as Signal the willingness and determination of the
United States to employ increasing force in support of...an
independent and stable noncommmist government in RVN end
@ free and neutral Laos....

"b. Reduce, prosressively, DRV support of the insur-
gencies in RVN and Laos to the extent necessary to tip the
balance clearly in favor of the Governments of RVN and Laos
by:

"(1) Reduction of the emount of support available
through destruction of men, material, and
supporting facilities;

"(2) .../and/ through diversion of DRV resources to
increased homeland defenses and alerts; and

"(3) Reduction of the rate of delivery of available
support through destruction of bridges and
other LOC. choke points...and through interrup-
tion of moyements....

"e. Punish the DRV for DRV-supported military actions
by the Viet Cong/Pathet Lao....

"a. Terminate the conflict in Laos and RVN only under
conditions which would result in the achievement of U.S.
objectives.” 102/

The final JCS proposal to be submitted relative to the "courses
of action" debate in November 1964 came in direct response to the NSC
Working Group's draft papers, circulated to interested agencies for
comment on 17 November. 103/ criticizing the group's assessment of U.S.
stakes and interests, the JCS called Southeast Asie "an area of major
strategic importence to the United States, the loss of which would lead
to grave political and military consequences in the entire Western
Pacific, and to serious political consequences world-wide." They reit-
erated their view that the best probability of success in attaining the
currently recognized U.S, Objectives in that region would be "by achiev-
ing the prerequisite objective of causing the cessation of DRV support
and direction of the insurgencies in RVN and Laos.” lok/

The JCS also criticized the three options described by the Work-
ing Group and outlined five alternatives to them, in an ascending order
of intensity: :

i 1. Terminate commitments in South Vietnam and Laos and withdraw
as gracefully as possible. The JCS called this "implicit in the content
of the NSC Working Group paper but...not clearly identified as a separate
and distinct option.”

OS TOP SECRET - Sensitive
