Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ec. A free decision by the South to succumb to the
VC or to the North. —

d. A neutral (or even anti-US) government in SVN.

e. A live-and-let-live "reversion to 1959."
Furthermore, we must recognize that even if we fail in
achieving this "soft" formulation, we could over time
come out with minimum damage:

f. If the reason was GVN gross wrongheadedness or
apathy.

g. If victorious North Vietnam "went Titoist."
h. .If the Communist take-over was fuzzy and very slow.

Current decisions, McNaughton argued, should reflect aware-
ness that the U.S. commitment could be fulfilled with something consider-
ably short of victory. "It takes time to make hard decisions," he wrote,
"Tt took us almost a year to take the decision to bomb North Vietnam;
it took us weeks to decide on a pause; it could take us months (and
could involve lopping some white as well as brown heads) to get us in
position to go for a compromise. We should not expect the enemy's
molasses to pour any faster than ours. And we should ‘tip the pitchers'
now if we want them to 'pour' a year from now."

But the strategy following from this analysis more or
less corresponded over the short term to that recommended by the Saigon
mission and the military commands: More effort for pacification, more
push behind the Ky government, more battalions for MACV, and intensive
interdiction bombing roughly as proposed by CINCPAC. The one change
introduced in this memorandum, prepared only one day after the other,
concerned North Vietnamese ports. Now McNaughton advised that the ports
not be closed. Why he did so is not apparent. The intelligence com-
munity had concurred a month earlier that such action would create "a
particularly unwelcome dilemma" for the USSR, but would provoke nothing
more than vigorous protest. 52/ Perhaps, however, someone had given
McNaughton a warning sometime on January 18 or 19 that graver consequences
could be involved. In any case, McNaughton introduced this one modifica-

tion.

The argument which coupled McNaughton's political analysis
with his strategic recommendations appeared at the end of the second

memorandum:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

43
