Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

When asked whether the U.S, refrained from bombing NVN's more vital
installations because it would escalate the war, the Secretary added:

Well, I'm saying that the other installations you're
speaking of are not directly related to insurgency in the
South, and that's what we're fighting. And that our tar-
geting should be associated with that insurgency....our
objective is to show them they can't win in the South.
Until we do show that to them it's unlikely the insurgency
in the South will stop. 26/

The Secretary's arguments had difficult sledding, however.
As 1965 ended, the bombing restrictions were still under attack. The
U.S. was heavily engaged in the ground war in the South, and a limited
pombing campaign in the North did not make much sense to those who
wanted to win it. The hawks were very much alive, and there was mounting
pressure to put more lightning and thunder into the air war. At that
point, in not very propitious circumstances, the Administration halted
the bombing entirely, and for 37 days, from 24 December 1965 to 31 Janu-
ary 1966, pursued a vigorous diplomatic offensive to get negotiations
started to end the war.

D. The "Pause" -- 24 December 1965 to 31 January 1966
1. The Pre-Pause Debate

An important element of the program developed by McNamara
and his Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs, John
McNaughton in July 1965 was a pause in the bombing of North Vietnam.
There had been a five-day pause in May, from the 13th through the 18th,
apparently inspired by the President himself in an effort to see if the
North Vietnamese government -- which had previously indicated that any
progress towards a settlement would be impossible so long as its terri-
tory was being bombed -- would respond with de-escalatory measures of
its own. Yet the President also saw a pause as a means of clearing the
way for an increase in the tempo of the air war in the absence of a
satisfactory response from Hanoi. The May pause had been hastily
arranged -- almost, so the record makes it seem, as if on the spur of
the moment -- and advance knowledge of it was so closely held, not only
within the international community but also within the U.S. government,
that no adequate diplomatic preparation could be made. Its most seri-
ous shortcoming as an effective instrument of policy, however, lay in
its very brief duration. To have expected a meaningful response in so
short a time, given the complexity of the political relationships not
only within the North Vietnemese government and party, but also between
Hanoi and the NLF in the South, and between Hanoi and its separate (and
guarrelling) supporters within the Communist world, was to expect the
impossible. 27/ Therefore, in his 20 July memorandum to the President,

.20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
