Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘ ena arc TOP SECRET

U. S. military aid already received. in Indochina has in-.
creased the capability of the State forces and French Union
forces considerably. If aid already furnished had not been
supplied, those forces would not have been able to maintain
their present positions, It is realized, however, that American
assistance is supplemental to, and does not replace the primary
responsibility of the three States and of the French Republic,

Ree nee ne

The United States has continued to extend political support
to the States of Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam, Agrément has been
granted for the first Cambodian Minister to the United States,

The United Kingdom has sent a diplomatic representative to the
three States. Vietnam.is planning to open a mission in Bangkok
and has sent a minister to London, Cambodia has named a minister
to Bangkok,

The three State Governments have been recognized by some
30 powers, They have been elected to membership in several UN
organs such as FAO, WHO and IZO. The USSR and its satellites,
including Communist China, have recognized the Ho Chi Minh move-
ment as constituting the legal government of Vietnam, but not of
Cambodia and Laos. ;

Although the Government of Thailand and the Republic of
Korea have extended diplomatic recognition to the three Govern-
ments, the majority of the Asian states continue to be apathetic
toward recognition. This attitude is based on an anti-colonial
rather than a pro-Communist sentiment, The result, nevertheless,
has been indirectly to encourage the Communist-directed Viet
Minh forces through failure to support the legal governments,
The French Government has done little in the past to publicize
the progressive transfer of authority to the three States, which
was completed by the end of 1950. In external affairs, the
French Government has the right to be consulted on the selection
of diplomatic posts, designation of Chiefs of Missions and
negotiation of international agreements, The continuing pre-
sence in Indochina, however, of a French High Commissioner and
some 70,000 French troops, as well as the fact that France
continues to finance, to a large degree, the budget deficits
of the three State Governments, may constitute in Asian eyes
evidence af continued French control, A withdrawal of French
financial and military support would resuit in rapid successes
by the Viet Minh forces and the formation of Communist govern-
ments within the three States. Asian states are only slowly
becoming aroused to this threat to their own independence as a
result both of United States efforts to identify it and of Chinese
activities in Korea and Tibet, in addition to Indochina,

TOP SECRET
