Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -. Sensitive

who criticized U.S. involvement in South Vietnam and urged a shift of
policy in support of the neutralization of all Southeast Asia. Senator
Dirksen voiced agreement (2 January) with the need for a policy reassess-
ment, preferably involving both the Administration and bi-partisan
Congressional leadership, but he stated his own view that “to give up in
Vietnam means a loss of face throughout the Orient. 220/

The debate blossomed in January. In @ particularly active
television day, Sunday, 3 January, Secretary Rusk defended Vietnam
policy in the context of a year-end foreign policy report. Ruling out
either a U.S. withdrawal or a major expansion of the war, Rusk gave
assurances that with internal unity, and our aid and persistence the
South Vietnamese could themselves defeat the insurgency. On another
network, three Senators expressed impatience with U.S. policy in Vietnam
and urged a public reevaluation of it. Senator Morse criticized our in-
volvement in South Vietnam on a unilateral basis, while Senators Cooper
and Monroney spoke in favor of a full-fledged Senate debate to “come to
grips" with the situetion there. Senator Mansfield also appeared on the
3rd, to urge consideration of Church's neutralization idea as an alterna-
tive to current policy but in keeping with the President's desire neither
to withdraw nor carry the war to North Vietnam. 221/ On the 6th, in
response to an Associated Press survey, the views in the Senate were
shown to be quite divided. Of 63 Senators commenting, 31 suggested @
negotiated settlement after the anti-communist bargaining positions were
improved, while 10 favored negotiating immediately. Eight others favored
commitment of U.S, forces against North Vietnam, 3 urged immediate
drawal of U.S. advisers and military aid, and 11 stated that they didn't
know what should be done other than to help strengthen the GVN. On
11 January, Senator Russell reacted to a briefing by CIA Director McCone
with a statement that "up until now we have been losing ground instead
of gaining it." He urged reevaluation of the U.S. position in South
Vietnem, cautioning that unless a more effective government ee aes in
Saigon the situation would become a prolonged stalemate at best. 222/

On 14 January, as a result of reports of the loss of two U.S.
jet combat aircraft over Laos, accounts of U.S. air operations against
Laotian infiltration routes gained wide circulation for the first time.
One in particular, a U.P.1I. story by Arthur Dommen, in effect blew the
lid on the entire YANKEE TEAM operation in Leos since Mey of 1964. 223/
Despite official State or Defense refusal to comment on the nature of the
Laotian air missions, these disclosures added new fuel to the public
policy debate. In a Senate speech the following day, in which he ex-
pressed his uneasiness over "recent reports of American air strikes in
Laos and North Vietnam," Senator MeGovern criticized what he called “the
policy, now gaining support in Washington, of extending the war to the
north." He denied that bombing orth Vietnam could seriously weaken
guerrilla fighters 1,000 miles away" and urged seeking a political
settlement" with North Vietnam. On the 17th, Senator Saltonstall told

a redio audience that he thought bombing the supply lines in Laos was

Th TOP SECRET - Sensitive
