Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On 31 October, in a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense, the
Secretary of the Army replied to General Westmoreland's request for the
deployment of the llth Infantry Brigade to arrive in Vietnam before
Christmas. He stated that the Army Staff had determined that the
Brigade could be deployed on or about December 10, by surface transporta-
tion from Hawaii to close in South Vietnam by 24 December. It would be
necessary for the Brigade to have the same kind of in-country training
on arrival in South Vietnam as the 10lst Airborne Division (-). The
only additional costs involved would be the slightly increased operating
costs from having the unit in South Vietnam one month earlier and being
combat ready in January rather than in February. 90/

On 6 November, Secretary of Defense approved the Army request for
the early deployment of the llth Light Infantry Brigade by surface
transportation to South Vietnam in December 1967, and directed that
necessary in-country training should be conducted in a low risk area. g1/

In the meantime, on 17 October 1967, the Joint Chiefs of Staff for-
warded to the President through the Secretary of Defense their reply to
the questions raised by the President at the White House luncheon on
12 September concerning what military actions consistent with present
policy guidelines would serve to increase pressure on North Vietnam,
thereby accelerating the rate of progress toward achievement of the U.S.
objective in South Vietnam. 92/

The Chiefs considered that North Vietnam was paying heavily for its
aggression and had lost the initiative in the South. They further con-
sidered that many factors indicated a military trend favorably to Free
World Forces in Vietnam. However, they again concluded that if accelera-
tion in the pace of progress was to be achieved, an appropriate increase
in military pressure was required.

The Chiefs then reiterated the policy guidelines established for the
conduct of military operations in SEA to achieve U.S. objectives, among
which were:

a. We seek to avoid widening the war into a conflict with
Communist China or the USSR.

b. We have no present intention of invading NVN.
ce. We do not seek the overthray of the Government of NVN.

d. We are guided by the principles set forth in the Geneva Accords

of 1954 and 1962. 93/
In a rather resigned tone, the Joint Chiefs indicated that they

considered the rate of progress to have been and to continue to be slow
largely because U.S. military power has been constrained in a manner

222 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
