Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

merely in power cloaked as revolution."

—

"Our purpose is equally clear and easily defined. In his Baltimore
speech of April T, 1965; President Johnson did so in the following terms:

‘Our objective is the independence of South Viet-Nam and its
freedom from-attack. We want nothing for ourselves--only that the
people of South Viet-Nam be allowed to guide their own country in their

own way.'

"This has been our basic objective since 1954. It has been pursued
by three successive administrations and remains our basic objective today.

"Like the Communists, we have secondary objectives derived from the
basic one. We intend to show that the 'war of liberation,' far from being
cheap, safe, and disavowable, is costly, dangerous, and doomed to failure.
We must destroy the myth of its invincibility in order to protect the
independence of many weak nations which are vulnerable targets for sub-
versive aggression--to use the proper term for the 'war of liberation.' -
We cannot leave while foree and violence threaten them.

"The question has been raised as to whether this clash of interests
is really important to us. An easy and incomplete answer would be that
it must be important to us since it is considered so important by the
other side. Their leadership has made it quite clear that they regard
South Viet-Nem as the testing ground for the ‘war of liberation' and that,
after its anticipated success there, it will be used widely about the
world. Kosygin told Mr. Reston in his interview of last December:

"We believe that national liberation wars are just wars and
they will Combate as long as there is national oppression by imperi-
alist powers.'

"Before him, Khrushchev, in January 1961, had the following to say:

"Now a word about national liberation wars. The armed struggle
by the Vietnamese people or the war of the Algerian people serve as the
latest example of such wars. These are revolutionary wars. Such wars
are not only admissible but inevitable. Can such wars flare up in the
future? They can. The Communists fully support such just wars and
march in the front rank of peoples waging liberation struggles.’

"General Giap, the Commander in Chief of the North Vietnamese forces,
has made the following comment:

"South Viet-Nem is the model of the national liberation move-
ment of our time. If the special warfare that the United States imperi-
alists are testing in South Viet-Nam is overcome, then it can be defeated

anywhere in the world.’

D-68
