Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Later that month Canadian Ambassador Chester Ronning went to Hanoi
to test for areas in which negotiations might be possible. He-returned
with little hove, other than a vague belief the ICC could eventually

play a role.

Early in April, UN Secretary General U Thant advocated
Security Council involvement in Vietnam if Communist China and North
Vietnam agreed, and he reiterated his three point proposal for getting
the parties together (cessation of bombing; scaling down of all mili-
tary activity; and willingness of both sides to meet). No response was
forthcoming from the DRV, but later that month during meetings of the
"third National Assembly" Ho and Premier Pham Van Dong reiterated the
unyielding North Vietnamese position that the U.S. must accept the four
points as the basis for solving the war before negotiations could start.
On April 29, Canadian Prime Minister Pearson proposed a ceasefire and
a gradual withdrawal of troops as steps toward peace. The ceasefire was
seen as the first part of peace negotiations without prior conditions.
Phased withdrawals would begin as the negotiations proceeded. The U.S.
endorsed the Pearson proposal which was probably enough at that stage
to insure its rejection by Hanoi. On the same day, Danish PM Krag urged
the US to accept a transitional coalition government as a realistic step
toward peace.

In May, Netherlands Foreign Minister Luns proposed a mutual
reduction in the hostilities as a step toward a ceasefire and to prevent
any further escalation. Neither side made any direct response. On May
22, Guinea and Algeria called for an end to the bombing and a strict
respect for the Geneva Agreements as the basis of peace in Vietnam. In
a major speech on May 25, U Thant called for a reduction of hostilities,
but rejected the notion that the UN had prime responsibility for finding
a settlement. Early in June press attention was focused on apparent
Romanian efforts to bring Hanoi to the negotiating table. Romanian
intermediaries made soundings in Hanoi and Peking but turned up no new
sentiment for talks. In mid-June Canadian Ambassador Ronning made a
second trip to Hanoi but found no signs of give in the DRV portion (detailed
discussion below). Near the end of June a French official, Jean Sainteny,
reported from Hanoi and Peking through Agence France-Presse that the DRV
had left him with the impression that negotiations might be possible if
the U.S. committed itself in advance to a timetable for the withdrawal of
forces from South Vietnam. With pressure again mounting for additional U.S.
measures against the North and the failure of the Ronning mission, the
State Department closed out this international effort on June 23 (the day
after the original POL execute order), stating that neither oral reports
nor public statements indicated any change in the basic elements of
Hanoi's position. On June 27, Secretary Rusk told the SEATO Conference
in Camberra, "I see no prospect of peace at the present moment.” 137/

The bombing of the POL storage areas in Hanoi and Haiphong began on

June 29.

111 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
