Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that could lead any of the Allies to expect a satisfactory outcome.
Yet, the alternative which the U.S. had kept open no longer seemed.
viable either. As Dulles told Smith, any "final agreement" with the
French would be "quite impossible," for Paris was moving farther than
ever from a determination that united action was necessary. "They
want, and in effect have, an option on our intervention," Dulles wrote,
"but they do not want to exercise it and the date of expiry of our
option is fast running out." 30/ From Paris, in fact, Ambassador
Dillon urged the Secretary that "the time limit be now" on U.S. inter-
vention." 31/ And Dulles was fast concluding that Dillon was correct.

ec. Dulles Withdraws Option

In view of France's feeling that, because of strong
Assembly pressure for a settlement, no request could be made of the
U.S. until every effort to reach agreement at Geneva had been exhausted, 32/
Dulles in effect decided on 15 June that united action was no longer
tenable. In a conversation with Bonnet, in which the Ambassador read
a message from Bidault which indicated that the French no longer con-
sidered the U.S, bound to intervention on satisfaction of the seven
conditions, the Secretary again put forth the difficulty of the
American position. He stated that the U.S. stood willing to respond
to a French request under the conditions of 11 May, but that time
and, circumstance might make future U.S. intervention “impracticable
or so burdensome as to be out of proportion to the results obtainable.”
While this standpoint would be unsatisfactory to Bidault, especially
in his dealings with the communists at Geneva, Dulles "could not conceive
that it would be expected that the U.S. would give a third power the
option to put it into war at times and under conditions wholly of the
other's choosing." 33/ United action was, then, not removed from con-
sideration at a later date; but it was shelved, and it never appeared
again in the form and with the purpose originally proposed.

ad. U.S. Turns to Studies with U.K. on Intervention

During this period of a gradual "break" with France on
united action, the alternative for the United States became a collec-
tive defense arrangement with British participation. Once again, U.S.
hopes shifted. to London, particularly when Eden, on 9 June, told Smith
of his extreme pessimism over the course of the negotiations. Smith
drew from the conversation the strong impression that Eden believed.
negotiations to have failed and would now follow the U.S. lead on a
coalition to guarantee Cambodia and Laos "under umbrella of some UN
action" (Smith's words). Whether the U.S. and U.K. would act prior
to or after a likely settlement at Geneva by the desperate French
became the major area of inquiry. 34

e. United Action Option Has Come Full Cycle

The rebirth and. demise of united action was a rare case
of history repeated almost immediately after it had been made. The

A-24 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
