Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

GVW to statements that GV is exercising right of self-
defense and we are assisting....disclose to selected
allies, and possibly USSR, U.S./GVN terms for cessation
of attacks as follows:

A. Demands:

1. DRV return to strict observance of 1954 Accords
with respect SVN -- that is, stop infiltration
‘and bring about a cessation of VC armed insur-

gency.
B. In return:

1. U.S. will return to 1954 Accords with respect
to military personnel in GVN and GVN would be
willing to enter into trade talks looking
toward normalization of economic relations
between DRV and GVii.

2. Subject to faithful compliance by DRV-with 1954
Accords, U.S. and GVN would give assurances that
they not use force or support the use of force
by any other party to upset the Accords with
respect to the DRV.

3. ...the GVN would permit VC desiring to do so to
return to the DRV without their arms or would

grant amnesty...”

Taylor went on to suggest that "if and when Hanoi indicates its aecep-
tance" the United States should avoid (1) the danger of a cease-fire
accompanied by prolonged negotiations and (2) “making conditions so
stringent" as to be impracticable. 148/

Significantly, the terms were to be conveyed to Hanoi privately.
They did not constitute a declaratory policy in the usual sense of that
term. Hence, it must be assumed that they would be presented to the DRV
with the attitude of "acceptance or else! -- that they were not per-
eeived primarily as conveying a firm public image. Moreover, the terms
were designed to accompany what became known as "phase two," the gradu-
ated pressures of Option ¢ -- not the 30-dey actions derived from
Option A. They were meant to represent the “early negotiating" posture
of the United Siates -- not the "no-negotiation” posture associated with
Option A.

This general attitude toward negotiations was apparently shared

by other Principals. This is indicated by changes made in Option C
procedures, in the Summary of the Working Group's findings, following

5s TOP SECRET - Sensitive
