4
HY

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

intelligence information, kept the level of violence at a low
enough level to preclude the active intervention of another
major power, accomplished the slow attrition of the French
while permitting the Viet Minh to build the regular forces
necessary for the final battles, offset the serious logistics
problem by the very primitiveness of transportation methods,
and surmounted the manpower shortage by making political and
economic operations inseparable from military operations. 17/

One could conclude from this assessment that RVNAF should be restruc-
tured to deal with this essentially internal challenge to South Vietnamese
stability. In a statement which may reflect the difficulty of reversing
institutional thought patterns -- at the U.S. Army's principal doctrine
formulating institution, in this instance -- it was claimed thet pacifi-
cation operations were undesirable because they detracted from training.
The suggestion was that the CG and SDC takeover of pacification should
be expedited:

The /South Vietnamese/ Army is still required to engage
from time to time in major pacification (internal security)
operations, pending the development of a higher state of
operational effectiveness of the Civil Guard and the Self-
Defense Corps. Since units have considerable personnel
turnover and are filled out with draftees, who have had only
basic and perhaps advanced individual training before arrival
in units, the orderly pursuit of a progressive unit training
schedule is essential to wit effectiveness. Each commitment
to an operational (pacification) mission, though of some
training value, in general interrupts the planned training
of participating units and delays arrival at a satisfactory
state of operational readiness. 18/

THE COUNTERINSURGENCY PLAN FOR SOUTH VINT-NAM

General McGarr's approach was to give emphasis in his advice to
recommendations designed to integrate the activities of ARVN and the
ca/spe. He consistently (and persistently) recommended the establishment
of a single chain of military command to guide all three forces. He
also pushed for steps which would free ARVN from static security (pacifi-
cation) missions in favor of offensive operations against the Viet Cong.
The vehicle for the first of McGarr's desired reforms was the "Counter-
insurgency Plan for Viet-Nam" (CIP), produced in late 1960. 19/ The
CIP was a blueprint for RVNAF reorganization, not an outline of the
strategy to be pursued. Not until September 1961 did MAAG present GVN
with a set of operational proposals in the form of a "Geographically
Phased National Level Operations Plan for Counterinsurgency." 20/

The CIP marks something of a halfway house between concern with

external defense and internal security. Both military tasks were recog-
nized, but internal security assumed primacy for the first time:

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
