G&

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

program which will leave no doubt that the US intends to win
and achieve a level of destruction which they will not be ©
able to overcome. Following such a sudden attack, a follow-on
program of increasing pressures is necessary, but at a rate of
inerease significantly higher than the present rate. 5/

The JCS accordingly recommended an immediate acceleration
in the scale, scope, and intensity of the bombing, beginning with heavy
strikes against POL targets and power plants in the Hanoi /Haiphong area
and continuing with aerial mining of NVN ports and air strikes against
the remaining "military and war-supporting" targets. Specifically, the
JCS proposed an immediate sharp blow against the remaining 9 of the
original 13 major POL tank farms, most of them in the Hanoi /Haiphong
area, and against 5 key power plants, 2 in Hanoi and others at Uong Bi,
Thai Nguyen, and Hon Gai, in order to "materially reduce enemy military
capabilities." These strikes would be followed by an accelerated program
of fixed target and armed reconnaissance strikes to cut down NVN's
ability to direct and support the war in the South. The follow-on program
would attack first the major airfields in the Hanoi/Haiphong area; then
the rail, road, and waterway LOCs throughout NVN, including the major LOC
targets in the Hanoi/Haiphong area, "at a rate of destruction that would
exceed the recuperability rate"; then the ports at Haiphong, Hon Gai,
and Cam Pha; and finally military installations and other targets of
military significance, such as the Ministry of Defense, the Radio Transmitter
Station, and the Machine Tool Plant in Hanoi; the Ammunition Depot at
Haiphong; and the Iron-Steel Combine and Army Supply Depot at Thai Nugyen.
SAM installations and other antiaircraft defenses would be attacked in
order to keep friendly losses down. According to the proposal, most
of the significant fixed targets in NVN would be destroyed within three
or four-months. Thereafter, the effort would concentrate on keeping the
targets inoperative and maintaining the pressure on LOCs. 6

The JCS proposal to escalate all aspects of the bombing
was largely oriented toward greatly increasing the pressure on Hanoi's
will. On the same day, however, in a separate memorandum, the JCS made
a strong pitch for an immediate attack on the NVN POL system as an inter-

diction measure:

Attack of this system would be more damaging to the
DRV capability to move war-supporting resources within
country and along the infiltration routes to SVN than an
attack ageinst any other single target system. 7/

It is not surprising that the JCS singled out the POL target
system for special attention. NVN had no oil fields or refineries, and
had to import all of its petroleum products, in refined form. During 1965,
it imported about 170,000 metric tons, valued at about $4.8 million. Nearly
all of it came from the Black Sea area of the USSR and arrived by sea at

Li

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
