Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

(c) Pending the formation and training of Indo-
chinese national armies as effective units, and as an |;
interim emergency measure, France will dispatch suffi--
cient additional armed forces to Indochina to insure

| that the restoration of peace and internal security in |;
that country will be accomplished in accordance with /

the timetable of the over-all military plan for Indo-

china e

(d) France will change its political and military

concepts in Indochina to:

i. Eliminate its policy of "colonialism",

States.

iii. Insure that a Sustavee military command
structure, unhampered by pol -itical interference, |
is established to conduct effective and apropri-_|
ss ~ate military operations.. The effective implemen-
“tation of these changes will require competent ana
efficient political and military leaders who will
be able to cope with the conditions in that coun-
try.

(3) At an appropriate time the United States should
institute checks to satisfy itself that the conditions set
forth in subparagraph ¢c-(2) above are being fulfilled.

a. The United States should exert all practicable political '
and diplomatic measures required to obtain the recognition of
ne Associated States by the other non-communist states of
seieost and South Asia.

e€. In the event of overt attack by organized Chinese Com-
cunist forces against Indochina, the United States should not

cern ut itself to become engaged in a general war with ee
ttina but should, in concert with the United Kingdom, support
*Tance and the Associated States by all means short of the ac-
tual snp soy eat of United Sta ates military forces. This support

nould include appropriate expansion of the present military
2ssistance program and endeavors to induce States in the neigh-
terhood of Indochina to commit armed forces to resist the ag-
eression,

3

f. The United States should immediately reconsider its pol-'
-cy toward Indochina whenever it appears that the French Govern-
=ent may abandon its military position in that country or plans
rie I

-O refer ie problem oF Indochina to the United Nations. Unless
“33 situa ion throughout the world generally, and Indochina

SR TE ~ 02 F TOP SECRET

a nee

|

ii. Provide proper tutelage to the Associated |
