Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3,000 spaces for the Army and 1,000 for the Air Force. These
requirements, and others, now outside the ceiling, will be
the subject for future recommendations.

Inclusion of elements of the 9th Marine Amphibious
Brigade, which CINCPAC plans to operate ashore in South
Vietnam only on a temporary basis, of nondeploying tactical
fighter squadrons, and of the 1,164 spaces for the augmented
hospital facilities for civilian war casualties, as directed
by references, has further reduced the force level recommended
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in JCSM-218-67, dated 20 April
1967, subject: "Force Requirements - Southeast Asia FY 1968 (U),"
and prevented inclusion of high priority units and personnel,
some of which are now available for deployment. 80/

The major differences in the refined troop list were the addition
of 3 light helicopter companies, 2 C-140 jet aircraft for the Ambassador
and visiting dignitaries, a Radio Research Aviation Company, and a
Marine fixed-wing reconnaissance squadron. Additionally, the helicopter
requirements included ambulance detachments and helicopters in the
supporting aviation headquarters for the 10lst Airborne Division and
the Americal Division. Other lower priority units were deleted.

The Secretary of Defense, on 5 October, approved for deployment
those forces listed in JCSM 505-67, and indicated that subsequent |
requests for additional high priority units should be accompanied by
appropriate trade-offs to insure forces remained within the total
personnel authorization of 525,000. 81/

On 28 September, General Westmoreland forwarded to CINCPAC and the
JCS his plan for reorienting in-country forces for the northeast monsoon
season. This reassessment of planned operations and force deployments
was necessitated, COMUSMACV indicated, in view of the accelerated deploy-
ment of the 10lst Airborne Division and the heavy enemy pressure in
I CTZ. COMUSMACV indicated that his overall fall-winter objectives were
to:

A. Relieve the lst Cav Div in Binh Dinh and commit it to
successive country-wide offensive operations...

B. Reinforce I CTZ to the extent practicable without unduly
retarding other progress.

C. Move additional elements of the 9th Inf Div to the Delta,

D. Reinforce III CTZ so that we can attack during favorable
weather...and force the enemy into a vulnerable posture
away from populated areas. 82/

.

219 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
