Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In support of this study and in order to permit necessary politi-
cal evaluations concerning the military alternatives available, the JCS
were asked to furnish their views on the following issues: (1) the overall
military capabilities of the DRV and Chinese Communists with respect to lo-
gistical capacity, geographical areas of operation, time required to initi-
ate operations, and capacity for concurrent reactions in different regions;
(2) military actions against NVN, using air end naval power only, which the
GVN might undertake alone or which the U. S. might undertake both with and
without public acknowledgment; (3) NVN targets, attack of which would be
most effective in inhibiting particular DRV military capabilities; (4) course
of action likely to bring about cessation of DRV support for the conflicts in
Laos and South Vietnam; (5) action most likely to deter communist attacks on
various parts of Asia in the event of a large-scale communist reaction to
attacks on NVN; (6) the extent to which the United States could counter such
reactions, using only air and naval operations and different ordnance com-
pinations; and (7) modifications needed in current contingency plans to pro-
vide for U.S. responses depending "primarily upon air activities rather
than the intervention of substantial U.S. ground forces." 25/

The work of the study group resulted in an interim report on 1 March
1964, just prior to Secretary McNamara's and CJCS Taylor's visit to South
Vietnam. This they carried with them in the form of a summary analysis
of the group's findings. During a brief stopover in Honolulu, these find-
ings and the issues raised by the Secretary's memorandum to the JCS were
discussed. Particular emphasis was given to the possible advantage to be
derived from converting the current operations into an "overt Vietnamese
program with participation by, /the/ U.S. as required to obtain adequate
results." 26/

C. Study Group Analysis of Proposed Actions

The study group had given considerable attention to over U. 5.
actions against North Vietnam. Its analysis was based on a concept of ex-
ploiting "North Vietnamese concern that their industrialization achieve-
ments might be wiped out or could be defended (if at all) only at the price
of Chicom control" and of demonstrating "that their more powerful communist
allies would not risk their own interests for the sake of North Vietnam."
The actions it proposed were aimed at accomplishing five objectives: (1)
induce North Vietnam to curtail its support of the Viet Cong in South
Vietnam; (2) reduce the morale of the Viet Cong; (3) stiffen the Khanh
government and discourage moves toward neutralism; (4) show the world that
we will take strong measures to prevent the spread of communism; and (5)
strengthen morale in Asia. However, the study group cautioned that "public
justification of our actions and its: expressed rationale must be based pri-
marily upon the fact of Northern support for and direction of the war in
the South in violation of the independence of South Vietnam." It then
outlined a series of public informational, domestic political, and inter-
national diplomatic steps desirable for establishing this justification. 27/

In seeking to achieve the objective cited above, the study group
suggested military actions with the best potential and raised some vital
policy issues. In ascending order of the degree of national commitment,
the study group believed each would entail, the military actions were as

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
