Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

lieve that the French will continue
without enthusiasm to maintain their
present levels of troop strength through
mid-1954 and will support the planned
development of the national armies of the
Associated States. a

.. 6. We believe that the Chinese Commu-
“ nists will continue and possibly increase
their present support of the Viet Minh.
However, we believe that whether or not
hostilities are concluded in Korea, the
Chinese Communists will not invade In-
dochina during this period.’ The Chi-
nese Communists will almost certainly
retain the capability to intervene so
forcefully in Indochina as to overrun
most of the Tonkin delta area before ef-

fective assistance could be brought to
bear.

“1, We believe that the Communist objec-

tive to secure control of all Indochina will

‘not be altered by an armistice in Korea or

by Communist “peace” tactics. How-
ever, the Communists may decide that
“peace” maneuvers in Indochina would
contribute to the attainment of Commu-
nist global objectives, and to the objective
of the Viet Minh.

8. If present trends in the Indochinese
situation continue through mid-1954, the
French Union political and military posi-
tion may subsequently deteriorate very
rapidly.

DISCUSSION

THE CURRENT SITUATION

9. Military Situation? The Viet Minh occu-
pation of the mountainous Thai country of
northwestern Tonkin in late 1952 and the
follow-up thrust into northern Laos in April
1953 demonstrate that the Viet Minh have
retained the military initiative in Indochina.
Although the Viet Minh did not defeat any
large French Union forces in these operations,
they did force the French to withdraw the
bulk of their offensive striking power from
the Tonkin delta and disperse it in isolated
strong points, dependent on air transport for
logistic support. At the same time, strong
Viet Minh guerrilla elements plus two regular

1The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint

Staff, believes that the intelligence available

is insufficient to permit a conclusion at this

time that the Chinese Communists will or will

not invade Indochina prior to mid-1954.

See Annex A for Estimated French Union
Strengths and Dispositions; ~-

See Annex B for Estimated Viet Minh Strengths
and Dispositions;

See Annex C for French Far Eastern Air Force
Strengths and Dispositions; and

See Annex D for French Far Eastern Naval
Strengths and Dispositions.

Viet Minh divisions sufficed to contain the
114,000 regular French Union forces remain-
ing in the Tonkin delta. The Viet Minh now
appear to have withdrawn the bulk of their
regular forces from Laos. They pronably
have leit behind political cadres, some regu-
lar forces, and well-supplied guerrilla units
in the areas which they overran in order to
consolidate Comimunist political and military
control, to prepare bases for future opera-
tions, and to pin down French Union gar-
risons.

10. The invasion of Laos may lave been un-
dertaken as part of a long-range Communist
design to develop unrest in Thailand and
ultimately gain control of all Southeast Asia.
Viewed solely in terms of the Viet Minh ob-
jective to win all of Indochina, however, the
Viet Minh offensive in Laos is an extension of
the 1952° winter’s offensive in northwestern
Tonkin, and represents a shift in Viet Minh
military tactics. This shift in tactics is
probably largely explained by the inability to
defeat the main French Union forces in the
Tonkin delta by direct assault. Faced with
this position of strength, the Viet Minh began

SECRET

pears, 2
