ho.

50.

51.

52.

93+

Sh.

DD «

56.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Secretary Rusk states, "I have always treated the SEATO
Treaty...as an important part of our commitment to defend
Svn." He further states that repulsion of Communist ag-
gression is as valid an objective today es when our earlier
commitments Were Made. .ccsccseccsceecsecesscuceseccsscesescenes

Leonard Unger discusses the national interests of the U.S. in
Vietnem as releted to checking the "Hanoi venture” so as not
to "feed the fires of the clearly expansionist thrust of
Communteb. Chinese DOLLY c.c6.s sce ais soe mwieintsesen's\n ess ole ciegieseeae=

Ambassador Goldberg relates clearly that U.S. interest in
Southeast Asia is motivated by its desire to see all the states
of that region remain free of foreign domination. .ccsssccssseee

Secretary Rusk reviews the factors which relate the security
of the U.S. to Southeast Asia: "...more than 200 million people
in Southeast. Asia, the geography of the area, the important
natural resources..., the relationship of Southeast Asia to
the total world situation and the effect upon the prospects of
a durable peace." He reviews the legal basis for U.S. actions
ae devetoped 4 BY, abOVEs «ic<us% 60\.046ee\s oeebew see nieieise acess

Secretary Rusk recalls the lessons of tolerating aggression in
pre-World War II days as it bears on the current "wars of
liberation" strategy espoused by Moscow and Peiping; emphasizes
the importance of SEATO in controlling aggression in Asia and
the credibility of U.S. commitments in preventing it elsewhere.

Vice President Humphrey emphasizes need of adapting to the new
conditions of subversive warfare, if independent, non-Commu-
nist states are going to grow and PLOUPISH. .cceeececcrccesevecs

President Johnson states U.S. presence in VN is "buying time
not only for SVN, but...for a new and a vital, growing Asia to
emerge" while demonstrating that guerrilla warfare against
weaker neighbors will not be tolerated. .ccccccssccscecccscesens

President Johnson states this country will not err again as

it has twice before in ignoring aggression. He vows to
demonstrate clearly the futility of aggression in any form
including puerrs Wille Wer tere seis wiclais <Wlsieeie'e/sieieeaitealst ses eames

President Johnson cites U.S. intention to fulfill its promises;
he cautions that guerrilla warfare, if successful in VN, pre-

D-75

D-76

D-77

D-78

D-81

p-8

D-85

D-87

sents a threat to Latin America, Africa and the rest of Asia... D-87

D-62

’
