Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive

has been used effectively by the communists in the past,
as the record of the Korean negotiations will reflect." 55/

To counter such a broad, coordinated strategy would require large
numbers of troops -~ even more than those listed under Program #4. To
many observers the concept of "sheer mass" doing the job was appealing.
Robert Komer returned from a mid-February trip to Vietnam no less
optimistic than before. Ever the inveterate optimist he reported to
the President that:

"After almost a ‘year full-time in Vietnam, and six
trips there, I felt able to learn a good deal more from
my 11 days in-country, 13-23 February. I return more
optimistic than ever before. The cumulative change since
my first visit last April is dramatic, if not yet visibly
demonstrable in all respects. Indeed, I'll reaffirm even
more vigorously my prognosis of last November which would
be achieved in 1967 on almost every front in Vietnam." 56/

He firmly believed that in time we would just overwhelm the VC in SVN:

"Wastefully, expensively, but nonetheless indis-
putably, we are winning the war in the South. Few of
our progrems -- civil or military -- are very efficient,
but we are grinding the enemy down by sheer weight and
mass. And the cumulative impact of all we have set in
motion is beginning to tell. Pacification still lags the
most, yet even it is moving forward." 571

Finally, and contrary to all military reports, he saw some let-up
in the pressures for additional resources:

"Indeed my broad feeling, with due allowance for
over-simplication, is that our side now has in presently
programmed levels e11 the men, money and other resources

needed to achieve success...." 58/

The preceding statement curiously seems to contradict the tenor of
the previous ones which plainly indicate the requirement for a massive
influx of U.S, forces. Nevertheless, such optimism, even considering
the source was surely to tell wpon a President deeply engrossed in
weighing alternatives in Vietnam and comparing their risks and benefits.

The most significant assessment of alternative strategies for
Vietnam in late February was a short analysis prepared for the President's
night reading by ISA and the JCS with an assist from Department of State. 59/
The assessment commenced with the presentation of three programs -- A, B
and C -- each one analyzed in terms of its specific actions, the authority
required and the policy changes required to implement them and the risk
or political impact attendant to each. (See Table, p. 50.) ‘The programs

hg TOP SECRET - Sensitive
