Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

“Moreover the military strength of our country and the needs
of our industry cannot be supplied from our own resources. Such
basic necessities as iron ore, bauxite for aluminum, manganese,
natural rubber, tin, and many other materials acutely important to
our military and industrial strength are either not produced in our
own country or are not produced in sufficient quantities to meet
our needs. This is an additional reason why we must help to remain
free the nations which supply these resources."

Se. 3

"Two fundamental purposes of our collective defense effort are
to prevent general war and to deter Communist local aggression.

“We know the enormous and growing Communist potential to launch
a war of nuclear destruction and their willingness to use this power
as a threat to the free world. We know also thst even local aggressions,
unless cheeked, could absorb nation after nation into the Communist
orbit--or could flame into world war.

"The protection of the free world against the threat or the
reelity of Soviet nuclear egeression or local attack rests on the
common defense effort established under our collective security egree-
' ments. The protective power of our Strategic Air Command and our
nayal air units is assured even greater strength not only by the
availability of bases abroad but also by the early warning facilities,
the defensive installations, and the logistic support installations
maintained on the soil of these and other allies and friends for our
common protection.

"The strategy of general defense is made stronger and of local
defense is made possible by the powerful defensive forces which our
allies in Europe, in the Middle Fest, and the Far Fast have raised
and maintain on the soil of their homelands, on the borders of the
Communist world." ;

* * =X
25. Address at the Gettysburg College Convocation: The Importance of
Understand April 1959, Public Papers of the Presidents--
Eisenhower, 1959, p. 310. 5

"J shall not attempt to talk to you about education, but I shall
speak of one vital purpose of education--the development of under-
standing--understanding, so that we may use with some measure of wisdom
the knowledge we may have acquired, whether in school or out.

B-l6 °
