Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. Awaiting a Response

While the Administration expected little in the way of a posi-
. tive Hanoi response, a wetchful eye was kept for any signals or actions
that might suggest North Vietnamese or Soviet receptivity to any further
diplometic explorations. Such signals as were received, however, were
entirely negative. On May 15 a Hanoi English language broadcast noted
Western news reports of the bombing cessation, terming them "a worn out
trick of deceit end threat..." On the seme day, in a conversation with
British Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart in Vienna, Soviet Foreign
Minister Andrei Gromyko indicated the USSR's disinclination to partici-
pate in any negotiations on Indochina.

In the meantime, in Saigon, the U.S. Mission was hard at work
trying to clarify its own thinking -- and that of Washington -- on the
persuasive, or rather coercive, possibilities of bombing pauses. In
particular, the Mission was hoping to link the intensity of US bombing
after the resumption closely to the level of VC activity during the
pause. The purpose would be to make it clear to Hanoi that what we were
trying to accomplish with our bombing was to get the DRV. to cease direct-
ing and supporting the VC and to get VC units to cease their military
activities in the South. In this approach, a downward trend in VC
activities would be "rewarded" in a similar manner -by decreasing US
bombing. Thus it was hoped that, during the bombing peuse, the DRV
would offer the first step in a series of events waich might ultimately
"lead to the termination of hostilities on satisfactory /i.e., U.S.
terms, without engaging in formal negotiations."

Ambassador Teylor described this approach to Washington in a
lengthy cable 128/ concurred in by Deputy Ambassador Johnson and General
Westmoreland. The Ambassador recognized that there were one or two minor
pitfalls in the scheme, but seemed undaunted in his confidence that US
bombing could be designed to have powerful coercive effects. Taylor
admitted that:

Any success in carrying out such a scenario [would] obviously
depend on a considerable amount of cooperation from the DRV side
based on a conviction arising from self-interest that the DRV
must accept a settlement which excludes the conquest of SVN by
NVN. There is little likelihood that the Hanoi leaders are yet
ready to reach such a conclusion, but a rigorous application of
air attacks at a tempo related to Hanoi/VC activities accom-
panied by pressure on the ground to compel the VC to engage in
incidents or retreat appears to us to have possibilities. Con-
ceivably, these ground operations might eventually result in
herding VC units into "safe havens"...Whatever its other weak-
nesses, such a program would eliminate in large measure the
danger which we may now be facing of equating our bombing ac-
tivity to VC initiated incidents, and of seeming to suggest that
we will stop bombing for good if the VC will simply lie low.

122 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
