Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The President approved a change of mission for all
Marine battalions deployed to Vietnam to permit their more
active use under conditions to be established and approved
by the Secretary of Defense in consultation with the Secre-
tary of State." 71/

This language may indicate that the President wanted to experiment very
carefully with a small amount of force before deciding whether or not
to accept any kind of ground war commitment. Implicit in the size of
that force and-in its location was the option to quickly evacuate it,
should the U.S. so desire. y,

It appears that the Ambassador interpreted the NSAM change of
mission as approval of his 27 March recommendation. He cabled Washington _
on the 4th of April that he would approach Quat with a proposal that the
Marines be permitted to conduct mobile operations within their TAOR's
and that they be used by the RVNAF as a reserve for operations up to
50 miles from their bases. Te/ The Vietnamese Prime Minister acquiesced
in the deployment of the two Marine BIT's plus one Tactical Fighter
eee, (F4) on the 6th of April and in the change in mission on the

th. 73

Taylor was at this juncture quite prepared to settle into a
period of careful experimentation with the level of combat power fixed
at four battalions. He said in a message dated 17 April that he had
about 60 days in mind as the appropriate period for the experiment, Th]
and he indicated he was chagrined by some apparent anxiety in Washington
to move considerably faster. Im a message also dated 17 April he ques-
tioned the Washington panic manifested in a whole panoply of "hasty and
ill-conceived" proposals for the deployment of more forces. In another
message he again cautioned against precipitous action and offered the
palliative that "things weren't going so badly" out there. 75/

Four Marine battalions were enough for experimentation, but not
so large as to alarm the xenophobic Vietnamese. In fact, the Ambassador's
sensitivity to the proclivities of the Vietnamese Prime Minister on the
question of foreign troops helps explain the Embassy's footdragging during
this critical period of U.S. build-up debate. Thus, the Ambassador was
surprised to discover that the Marines had come ashore with tanks, self-
propelled artillery, and various other items of weighty equipment not
"appropriate for counterinsurgency operations." 76/ . That equipment,
bland JCS explanxtions mentioning contingency plans and full TOE prudence
notwithstanding, Tt/ implied a permanence not communicated to Quat
when clearance for their entry had been sought. Similarly, the decision
to deploy the 173rd, had it been executed, would have placed Taylor in an
exceedingly embarrassing position as he had not mentioned it to the GVN.

69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
