SS

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the U.S. stand ready to provide 40,000 tons under title II PL 480 for
distribution to the Armed Forces. Wo U.S. commitments were made. Talks

were exploratory. 42/

Although the USG recognized the weslmesses of GVN, as noted at the
end of Section 1, these merely aroused concern at the highest levels, not
alarm. An extreme example of the emphasis of this period is found in W.W.
Rostow's memorandum to the Secretary of State dated February 13, 1964.

In a context emphasizing the importance of success in Vietnam to U.S. in-
terests everywhere, Rostow wrote only ebout the role of North Vietnam in
the insurgency, relegating South Vietnam's governmental problems (and those
of Laos) to a vague clause in one sentence:

"South Vietnam is in danger. The internal position in
South Vietnam created by the systematic operations conducted
from North Vietnam is precarious...although difficult tasks
would still be faced in South Vietnam and Iaos if’ North
Vietnamese compliance with the 1962 agreement was enforced,
we see no possibility of achieving short-run or long-run
stability in the area until it is enforced."

In a cable to the President, Lodge expressed the same view. In addition,
he compared the sanctions used against Diem with the sanctions being con-
sidered against the North, and thus by implication treated the fall of
Diem as the end of the problem of good government in the South. 43/ Rightly
or wrongly, the USG viewed North Vietnamese support and direction of the
insurgency as the overriding problem, not merely in its public posture

(as represented by President Johnson's new year's greeting to General Minh,
quoted on page 3, above, and by the State White Paper, "Ageression From

the North," issued February 27), but also in its internal policy discus-
Sions. Rostow's statement says that there is no wey to achieve short-run
or long-run stebility in Southeast Asia without putting a stop to this
support and direction, and gives short shrift to GVN reform. To the ex-
tent that this view was accepted, it tended to set the face of U.8. policy
looking outward across South Vietnam's borders, putting South Vietnamese
weaknesses in the background, mainly to be dealt with after the 1962 Agree-
ment is enforced.

When the issue came up of the GVN's internal military and politi-
cal failures, all agreed that these were serious, but there was seldom
any action. Occasional references (e.g., Honolulu, 1964), and conversations
with some of the principals, make it clear thet the explanation for this
Jack of action was the fear that the GVN was a house of cards, which would
collapse if we pushed too hard. This fear of GVN wesalaiess proved to be
a consistent source of strensth to GVN in its negotiations with the Embassy’
and with the USSG.

4, McNamara's March Trip and NSAM 286

For several days beginning on March 8, 1964, Secretary McNamara
conferred with GVN leaders and with U.S, officials in Saigon. The trip

10” TOP SECRET - Sensitive
