Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the United States military point of view, might prevent communist expansion
in Southeast Asia. 34/ The six most important points made by the Chiefs
are these:

(1) A recommendation for early implementation of military
aid programs for Indochina and the other states of Southeast Asia, with
funds already allocated to the states of Southeast Asia,to be delivered at
the earliest practicable date and to be augmented as a matter of urgency with
funds from the unallocated portion of the President's emergency fund. For
the next fiscal year, an estimated $100 million will be required for the
military portion of this program.

(2) "In view of the history of military aid in China, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff urge that these aid programs be subject, in any event,
to the following conditions:

"a, That United States military aid not be granted
unconditionally; rather that it be carefully controlled and that the ald
program be integrated with political and economic programs; and

"pb. That requests for military equipment be screened
first by an officer designated by the Department of Defense and on duty in
the recipient state. These requests should be subject to his determina-
tion as to the feasibility and satisfactory coordination of specific military
operations. It should be understood that military aid will only be considered
in connection with such coordinated operational plans as are approved by the
representative of the Department of Defense on duty in the recipient country.
Further,.in conformity with current procedures, the final approval of all
programs for military materiel will be subject to the concurrence of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff."

(3) "Formation of a Southeast Asia Aid Committee is recom-
mended. ‘

(4) “The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize the political
implications involved in military aid to Indochina. It must be appreciated,
however, that French armed forces ... are in the field and that if these
were to be withdrawn this year because of political consideretions, the Bao
Dai regime probably could not survive even with United States aid. If the
United States were now to insist upon independence for Vietnam and a phased
French withdrawal from that country, this might improve the political
situation. The French could be expected to interpose objections to, and
certainly delays in such a program. . Conditions in Indochina, however, are
unstable and the situation is apparently deteriorating rapidly so that the
urgent need for at least an initial increment cf military and economic aid
is psychologically overriding. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, therefore,
recommend the provision of military aid to Indochina at the earliest prac-
ticable date under a program to implement the President's action approving
the allocation of $15 million for Indochina and that corresponding incre-
ments of political and economic aid be programmed on an interim basis with-
out prejudice to the pattern of the policy for additional military, sa es
and economic aid that may be developed later."

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
