Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There is no need for this to be so.

There is no need to delay the talks that could = an
end to the long and this bloody war.

Tonight, I renew the offer I made last August -- to
stop the bombardment of North Vietnam. We ask that talks
begin promptly, that they be serious talks on the substance
of peace. We assume that during those talks Hanoi will not
take advantage of our restraint.

We are prepared to move immediately toward peace through
negotiations.

So, tonight, in the hope that this action will lead to
early talks, I am taking the first step to de-escalate the
conflict. We are reducing -- substantially reducing -- the
present level of hostilities.

And we are doing so unilaterally, and at once.

Tonight, I have ordered our aircraft and our naval
vessels to make no attacks on North Vietnam, except in the
area north of the DeMilitarized Zone where the continuing
enemy build-up directly threatens allied forward positions
and where the movements of their troops and supplies are
clearly related to that threat.

The President then defined, albeit vaguely, the area within which the
pombing would be restricted and suggested that all bombing could halt if
the other side would reciprocate by scaling down hostilities.

The area in which we are stopping our attacks includes
almost 90 percent of North Vietnam's population, and most of
its territory. Thus there will be no attacks around the
principal populated areas, or in the food-producing areas
of North Vietnam.

Even this very limited bombing of the North could come
to an early end -- if our restraint is matched by restraint
in Hanoi. But I cannot in good conscience stop all bombing
so long as to do so would immediately and directly endanger
the lives of our men and our allies. Whether a complete
pombing halt becomes possible in the future will be determined

by events.

198 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
