Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"A recent enalysis suggests that if the present rate of
infiltration is maintained the annual figure for 1964 will
be of the order of 10,000. Furthermore...we are finding
more and more ‘bona fide' North Vietnamese soldiers among
the infiltrees. I feel sure that we must soon adopt new
and drastic methods to reduce and eventually end such infil-
tration if we are ever to succeed in South Vietnam."h/

A similar report was cabled directly to the White House on 16 October.
In it, Ambassador Taylor repeated his comments on infiltration and
advised the President of the steadily worsening situation in South
Vietnam. The Ambassador reported the infiltration of northern-born
conscripts and relayed GVN claims that they were coming in organized
units. He pointed out that with the advent of the dry season, the
problem would assume even greater magnitude and urged that it be given
immediate attention. 5/

The Taylor estimates of end-year infiltration totals probably
were quite alarming. If accurate they indicated that the rate had
risen sharply during September and early October: The totel number of
infiltrees for 1964 as of 1 September was then estimated as 4,700. 6/
Of particular concern, no doubt, was the apparent emphasis on reinforc-
ing Coumunist units in the Central Highlands and in the northern
provinces of South Vietnam. These warnings came hard on the heels of
widespread press reports of badly weakened GVN control in three portions
of the country. 7/

The JCS seized on these fresh reports and resubmitted their pro-
posals for taking prompt measures egainst North Vietnam. On 21 October,
they argued: ;

"Application of the principle of isolating the guerrilla
foree from its reinforcement and support end then to frag-
ment and defeat the forces has not been successful in Vietnam
+«+elhe principle must be applied by control of the national
boundaries or by eliminating or cutting off the source of
supply and direction.” 8/

On the 27th they submitted a major proposal for "strong military actions”
to counteract the trends cited in the national intelligence estimates

and in the Taylor cables. In languase identical to that used in two
August memoranda and at the September strategy meeting, they stated that
such actions were “required now in order to prevent the collapse of the
U.S. position in Southeast Asia." They then recommended a program of
actions to support the following strategy:

a. Depriving the Viet Cong of out of country assistance by

applying military pressures on the...DRV to the extent necessary to
cause the DRV to cease support and direction of the insurgency.

"2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
