Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSI?PIVE

Vietnam, then surely we are the godparents...If it falls victim
to any of the perils that threaten its existence...our prety lee
in Asia will sink to a new low.

"(4)...The key position of Vietnam in Southeast Asia...
makes inevitable the involvement of this nation's security
in any new outbreak of trouble."

Senator Kennedy was followed by Walter S. Robertson, Assistant Secretary
of State for Far Eastern Affairs, who declared that the U.S. sought: 119/

"To support a friendly non-Communist government in
Vietnam and to help it diminish and eventually eradicate
Communist subversion and influence.

"To help the government of Vietnam establish the forces
necessary for internal security.

"To encourage support for Free Vietnam by the non-
Communist world.

"Po aid in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of a
country and people ravaged by eight ruinous years of civil
and. international war.

"Our efforts are directed first of all toward helping
sustain the internal security forces consisting of a
regular army of about 150,000 men, and mobile civil guard
of some 45,000 and local defense units which are being
formed to give protection against subversion on the village
level...."

Dr. Tom Dooley described emotionally the plight of the refugees from
North Vietnam, and sketched in graphic terms Viet Minh terrorism.
Professor Hans Morganthau extolled the Geneva Settlement and status
quo in Vietnam as a logical balancing of the interests of the powers
concerned, and General O'Daniel described how the Vietnamese had been
given the opportunity to select the type of military organization they
like best, and had "followed the U.S. pattern.” 120/

But from Saigon, Ngo Dinh Diem addressed a sober, Ber ee ae
letter to the American Friends of Vietnam on the note that "we have

arrived at a critical point in our national life." He concluded with

the assertion that: "It is indispensable that our army have the where-
withal to become increasingly capable of preserving the peace which we
seek....Economic aid can be only effective once security is restored...." 121/

From Hanoi to the peoples of Southeast Asia, a commentary on the
1 June conference in Washington was broadcast in Vietnamese headlines:

32 TOP SECRET = SENSITIVE
