Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In the final analysis rural security, the sine qua non
of popular identification with the GVN, must be provided by
the Vietnamese themselves. The two keys here are (1) the
calibre and role of the 4h province chiefs (and their sup-
porting staffs) and (2) a properly offensive sense of mission
on the part of ARVN units - and their commanders - assigned
to rural security support missions. In every area (village,
district, province, DTZ and corps) the RVNAF unit commanders
responsible for security in that area must be graded (i.e.
promoted, commended or sacked) primarily on their ability
to find, fix and eradicate the VC Force indigenous to that
area. They must also be graded (with commensurate effect
on their careers) with respect to the behavior of their
troops vis-a-vis the populace in that area.

4, Drive on the Viet Cong Infrastructure - In our con-
cern over the behavior of our allies, we must not neglect our
enemies and the present opportunity to compound and exacerbate
communist problems. Operation Phoenix which is targetted
against the Viet Cong must be pursued more vigorously in closer
diaison with the US. Vietnamese armed forces should be devoted
to anti-infrastructure activities on a priority basis. The
Tet offensive surfaced a good deal of the infrastructure and
the opportunity to damage it has never been better. This
would force the VC on the defensive and head off the estab-
lishment of local VC administrative organizations and VC
attempts to set up provisional governmental committees.

5. US-ARVN Command Relationships - While we accept the

Mission's reluctance to create a joint command, we believe
that alternative arrangements which give the US a greater
role in ARVN employment are necessary. This can be done at
the Corps level and below. It would involve US participation
in the planning and control of ARVN operations. It might
even call for the prior approval by US advisors of ARVN
operational plans -- this now exists in certain cases
depending upon individual advisor relationships. We

should request MACV to study the matter and come up with

a specific plan to meet the requirement.

6. Government Reform and Anti-Corruption Campaign -

The beginning steps at administrative reform which President
Thieu has innounced must be accelerated. This should be
directly associated with a new deal on corruption, which must
be dealt with by relief of a specified list of corrupt offi-
cials now and the promise of severe action in the future.

A capable Inspectorate should be established. Incompetent
ARVN officers must be removed, beginning with a specific

list that should be made available by MACV. Incompetent
province chiefs who have plagued our efforts in the past
must be removed. The removal of incompetent commanders

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

«
