Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

{ *

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Returning from this session shortly after 1500, secretary McNamara,
along with Deputy Secretary Vance, joined with the JCS to review all the
evidence relating to the engagement. Included in this review was the
communications intelligence information which the Secretary reported,
containing North Vietnamese reports that (1) their vessels were engaging
the destroyers, and (2) they had lost two craft in the fight. In the
meantime, however, messages had been relayed to the Joint Staff indicating
considerable confusion over the details of the attack. The DE SOTO Patrol
Commander's message, expressing doubts about earlier evidence of a large-
seale torpedo attack, arrived sometime after 1330 hours. Considerably
later (it was not sent to CINCPACFIM until 1447 EDP), another message
arrived to the effect that while details of the action were still confusing,
the commander of Task Group 72.1 was certain that the ambush was genuine.

He had interviewed the personnel who sighted the boat's cockpit lights
passing near the Maddox, and he had obtained a report from the C. Turner
Joy that two torpedoes were observed passing nearby. Accordingly, these
reports were discussed by telephone with CINCPAC, and he was instructed

by Secretary McNamara to make a careful check of the evidence and ascertain
whether there was’ any doubt concerning the occurrence of an attack. CINCPAC
called the JCS at least twice more, at 1723 and again at 1807 hours, to stat
that he was convinced on the basis of "additional information" that the
attacks had taken place. 30/ At the time of the earlier call Secretary
McNamara and the JCS were discussing possible force deployments to follow
any reprisals. On the occasion of the first call, the Secretary was at

the White House attending the day's second NSC meeting. Upon being informed
of CINCPAC's call, he reports:

"I spoke to the Director of the Joint Staff and asked him
to make certain that the Commander in Chief, Pacific was willing
to state that the attack had taken place, and therefore that he
was free to release the Executive Order because earlier in the
afternoon I had told him that under no circumstances would retali-
atory action take place until we were, to use my words, ‘damned
sure that the attacks had taken place.'" 31/

At the meeting of the National Security Council, proposals to deploy
certain increments of OPLAN 37-64 forces to the Western Pacific were dis-
cussed, and the order to retaliate against North Vietnamese patrol craft
and their associated facilities was confirmed. Following this meeting,
at 1845, the President met with 16 Congressional leaders from both parties
for a period of 89 minutes. Reportedly, he described the second incident
in the Gulf, explained his decisions to order reprisals, and informed the
legislators of his intention to request a formal statement of Congressional
support for these decisions. On the morning following the meeting, The
Washington Post carried a report that none of the Congressional leaders
present at the meeting had raised objections to the course of action
planned. Their only question, the report stated, “had to do with how
Congress could show its agreement and concern in the crisis." 32/

9 TOP SECRE - Sensitive

a

e
