Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

ye

EVENT OR
DATE DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

discussing the severe security problem ~~~
at Da Nang and USG concern about it.
Although he wished more GV battalions
could be sent there, Taylor would say
he knew ARVIi troops were chronically
Short in I Corps and he knew any rede-
ployment would impose prohibitive costs
to security in other areas. Thus, he
would say "the USG has been driven to
consider a solution which we have
always rejected in the past: the intro-
duction of U.S. ground combat forces to
reinforce the defense of Da Nang until
GVN forces become available for the
purpose."

1 Mar 65 CICS Letter to General Wheeler said the JCS were address-
SecDef (forward- ing Southeast Asia force levels separately
ing JSOP-70) because that was a "specific problem area”

.requiring a "near term and long term

solution." This suggests the JCS prob-

ably had been considering deployment of

U.S. troops to Vietnam -- perhaps for

active operations -- before the Marine

deployment to Da Nang.

‘

2 Mar 65 DOD Tel 6166 ASD(ISA) McNaughton cabled Taylor that the
173d Airborne Brigade (then on Okinawa)
would be deployed to Da Nang instead of
the Marines. (This last minute change
may have been Mr. McNaughton's attempt to
emphasize the limited, temporary nature
of the U.S. troop deployment and to reduce
the conspicuousness of the U.S. presence.
Airborne troops carry less equipment and
look less formidable than the Marines plus

. they have no history of peace-keeping
intervention in foreign wars.)

2 Mar 65 EMBTEL 1954 Taylor and Westmoreland -- who argued that
the Marines were more self-sustaining than
the airburne -- objected to the proposed
substitution of Army airborne for Marine
troops.

3 Mar 65 CINCPAC Message CINCPAC strongly objected to Mr. Meliaughton’:

to JCS 0302302 proposal. It. denied him the only airborne
assault force in the theater and, more

xii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
