Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Army - Based on a comprehensive capability study recently
completed, Army concludes it is not in a position to make
further accelerations without jeopardizing capability to

deploy remaining units in Program 5 in an orderly manner.

Navy - The bulk of the 3000 Navy forces scheduled to deploy
after 1 March 1968, are linked to ship/waterborne craft
conversion or construction. They are susceptible to little
acceleration and cannot be accelerated into the JAN/FEB 68
time frame.

Air Force - Excluding the TFS maintained in CONUS ready for
deployment, the Air Force has only 760 personnel scheduled

to deploy after 1 March 1968. These include a CE Squadron
(scheduled for civilianization had funds been available) and

6 UC-123 herbicide aircraft. The CE Squadron must be
activated and equipped and the aircraft must be spray equipped.

Marine Corps - Contingent upon Department of Defense approval
(which is expected in the near future) of a PCR for additional
end strength increase to deploy and sustain 800 CAC personnel,
the Marine Corps will have only 164 Program 5 spaces remaining
for deployment after 1 March 1968. The 164 personnel are
associated with an observation squadron for which pilots and
aircraft are not available. 97/

On 27 November 1967, the Joint Chiefs of Staff provided the Secretary
of Defense their views on planned and recommended military operations to
be conducted in Southeast Asia over the next four months. They concluded,
rather pessimistically again, that: '

There are no new programs which can be undertaken under
eurrent policy guidelines which would result in a rapid or
significantly more visible increase in the rate of progress
in the near term. 98/

The Chiefs recommended against a stand-down in military operations
for any of the forthcoming holidays, as progress during the next, four
months would be dependent upon the maintenance of pressure upon the

enemy.

Any action which serves to reduce the pressure will be
detrimental to the achievement of our objectives. 99/

While progress toward U.S. military objectives was expected to be
sustained during the period under consideration, the Joint Chiefs held
that additional gains could be realized through the modification and
expansion of certain current policies. Thus, they recommended that current
policies for the conduct of the war in SEA during the next four months be
modified and expanded to permit a fuller utilization of our military
resources.

226 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
