Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

5 reserves end upon immediate and long-range economic effects
; in the supplying countries.

* (4) Negotiation of treaties of friendship, commerce and
navigation with non-Conmmunist countries of Asia to define
end establish conditions facilitating capital movements,
trade-and other economic relations between them and the
United States.

(5) Encouragement of private United States investment
in non-Communist countries and support of the early exten-
sion of credits by the International Bank and the Export-
Import Bank for specific key economic projects of a self-
liguidating nature, especially those directed towards in-
creasing production of food in this area.

(6) Efforts to obtain the adherence of Asiatic coun-
tries to the principles of multilateral, non-discriminatory
trade as embodied in the General Agreements on Tariffs and
Trade, as a means of reducing trade barriers and expanding
the international and intra-regional trade of the region on
an economic basis. This would include, for example, further
efforts to secure the benefits of most-favored-nation treat-
ment for Japan.

e) = ad. The question of e peace settlement with Japan, now re-
ceiving separate consideration, will be presented for the con-
sideration of the National Security Council at 4 later date and
policies with respect to Japan will be re-evaluated after the
decision regarding a peace treaty has been made.

e. (1) The United States should continue to provide for
the extension of political support and economic, technical,
military and other assistance to the democratically-elected
Government of the Republic of Korea.*

(2) The United States should therefore press forward
with the implementation of the ECA, MDAP, USIE and related
progrems for Korea, and should continue to accord political
support to the Republic of Korea, both within and without
the framework of the United Nations.

fF, (1) The United States should continue to recognize the
National Government of China until the situation is further
clarified.** The United States should avoid recognizing the
Chinese Communist regime until it is cleerly in the United
States interest to do so. The United States should continue

* WSC 6/2, approved March 23, 1949.
a ** Nso 34/2.

HSC 48/2 : TOP SECRET
