Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the rest of Southeast Asia and India, and in the longer
term, of the Middle East (with the probable exceptions

of at least Pakistan and Turkey) would in all probability
progressively follow. Such widespread alignment would
endanger the stability and security of Europe.

"pb. Communist control of all of Southeast Asia
would render the U.S. position in the Pacific offshore
island chain precarious and would seriously jeopardize
fundamental U.S. security interests in the Far East.

"ec. Southeast Asia, especially Malaya and
Indonesia, is the principal world source of natural
rubber and tin, and a producer of petroleum and other
strategically important commodities. The rice exports
of Burma and Thailand are critically important to Malaya,
Ceylon and Hong Kong and are of considerable significance
: to Japan and India, all important areas of free Asia.

"d. The loss of Southeast Asia, especially of
Malaya and Indonesia, could result in such economic and
political pressures in Japan as to make it extremely
difficult to prevent Japan's eventual accommodation to

communism." h/

The possibility of a large-scale Chinese intervention in Indochina,
similar to the Chinese intervention in Korea, came to dominate the thinking
of American policy-makers after the start of the Korean War. Such an inter-
vention would not have been surprising given the larger numbers of Chinese
troops massed along the Tonkin border and the materiel assistance being
given to the Viet Minh. The NIE of December 1950 considered direct Chinese
intervention to be "impending." Bf The following year it was estimated
that after an armistice in Korea the Chinese would be capable of inter-
vention in considerable strength, but would be inhibited from acting overtly
by a number of factors, including the risk of American retaliation and the
disadvantages attendant upon involvement in another protracted campaign. _6/
By early 1952,as the French position showed signs of deterioration, intel-
ligence authorities believed that the Chinese would be content to continue
aiding the Viet Minh without undertaking direct involvement (except for
material aid) unless provoked into it. oy Thus, the intelligence com-
munity, after estimating a high risk of Chinese intervention at the start
of the Korean War, gradually reduced its estimate of Indochina being
broadened into a wider war as the Viet Minh showed signs of doing well
enough on their own.

Nevertheless, the NSC undertook in 1952 to list a course of action
for the "resolute defense" of Indochina in case of a large-scale Chinese
intervention. It included the provision of air and naval forces; the
interdiction of Chinese communication lines, including those in China
proper; and a naval blockade of the China coast. If these "minimum courses
of action" did not prove to be sufficient, the U.S. should take air and

A-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
