Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

now cease its efforts to achieve a military victory and will
join with us in moving toward the peace table.

And there may come a time when South Vietnam -- on both
sides -- are able to work out a way to settle their own
differences by free political choice rather than by war.

As Hanoi considers its course, it should be in no
doubt of our intentions. It must not miscalculate the pres-
sures within our democracy in this election year.

We have no intention of widening this war.

But the United States will never accept a fake solution
to this long and arduous struggle and call it peace.

No one can foretell the precise terms of an eventual
settlement.

Our objective in South Vietnam has never been the
annihilation of the enemy. It has been to bring about a
recognition in Hanoi that its objective -- taking over the
South by force -- could not be achieved.

We think that peace can be based on the Geneva Accords
of 1954 -- under political conditions that permit the South
Vietnamese -- all the South Vietnamese -- to chart their
eourse free of any outside domination or interference, from
us or from anyone else.

So tonight I reaffirm the pledge that we made at
Manila -- that we are prepared to withdraw our forces from
South Vietnam as the other side withdraws its forces to the
North, stops the infiltration, and the level of violence
thus subsides.

Our goal of peace and self-determination in Vietnam
is directly related to the future of all of Southeast Asia --
where much has happened to inspire confidence during the past
10 years. We have done all that we knew now to do to contribute
“and to help build that confidence.

The President praised the progressive developments in much

of Asia in recent years and offered the prospect of similar progress in
Southeast Asia if North Vietnam would settle the war. He repeated the
Johns Hopkins offer of assistance to North Vietnam to rebuild its economy.
In his peroration he spoke with deep conviction and much feeling about
the purposes and reasons for the U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia's

200 * . TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
