Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"domino theory." Discussion of the line of containment centered about where
that line was to be drawn: Indochina, and, later, Korea, fell on the free

side of that line. 15/ The domino notion had been advanced by General Claire
Chennault, among others, in the reference to Nationalist China 16/; the domino
theory as applied to Indochina reinforced the decision of where to draw the
line of containment. Both ideas were embodied by the Joint Chiefs of Staff

in a 1950 memorandum to the Secretary of Defense evaluating "the strategic
importance, from the military point of view, of Southeast Asia":

"ce. Southeast Asia is a vital segment in the line of
containment of Communism stretching from Japan southward and
around to the Indian Peninsula... The security of the three
major non-Communist base areas in this quarter of the world --
Japan, India, and Australia -- depends in a large measure on
.the denial of Southeast Asia to the Communists. If Southeast
Asia is lost, these three base areas will tend to be isolated
from one another;

"ad. The fall of Indochina would undoubtedly lead to the
fall of the other mainland states of Southeast Asia...

"e. The fall of Southeast Asia would result in the
virtually complete denial to the United States of the Pacific
Littoral of Asia...

"f.  ... Soviet control of all the major components of
Asia's war potential might become a decisive factor affecting
the balance of power between the United States and the USSR...

"g. A Soviet position of dominance over the Far East
would also threaten the United States position in Japan... The
feasibility of retention by the United States of its offshore
island bases could thus be jeopardized." 17/

This theory, whether more or less completely articulated, appears in the
relevant NSC papers of the Indochina War period, and underlies all major
U.S. policy decisions taken relevant to the area. 18/

hk. U.S. Perception of the Chinese Communist Threat

In the words of NSC 64 (February, 1950), "The presence of Chinese
Communist troops along the border of Indochina makes it possible for arms,
material and troops to move freely from Communist China to the northern
Tonkin area now controlled by Ho Chi Minh. There is already evidence of
movement of arms.” 19/ NIE 5 maintainec somewhat later, as the decision
to help the French was being re-examined, that: "Ihe Communist Chinese
regime is already furnishing the Viet Minh materiel, training, and technical
assistance. Official French sources report thet Chinese Communist troops
are already present in Tonkin in some strength... 20/ Direct intervention
by Chinese Communist troops may occur at any time... It is almost certain

h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
