Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

held that vital U.S. interests were at stake in Indochina, and those
who were unwilling to make a firm decision to intervene with U.S.

ground forces to assure those interests. Consequently, when the French
began pressing for U.S. intervention at Dien Bien Phu, the Eisenhower
Administration took the position that the U.S. would not intervene uni-
laterally, but only in concert with a number of European and Far Eastern
allies as part of a combined force. (Tab 1)

This “united action" proposal, announced publicly by Secretary
Dulles on March 29, 1954, was also designed to offer the French an
alternative to surrender at the negotiating table. Negotiations for
a political settlement of the Franco-Viet Minh war, however, were assured
when the Big Four Foreign Ministers meeting in February at Berlin placed
Indochina on the agenda of the impending Geneva Conference. Foreign
Minister Bidault insisted upon this, over U.S. objections, because of
the mounting pressure in France for an end to the seemingly interminable
and costly war. The "peace faction" in Paris became stronger in propor-
tion to the "peace feelers” let out by Ho Chi Minh, and the lack of
French success on the battlefield. U.S. policy was to steer the French
away from negotiations because of the fear that Indochina would thereby
be handed over to the communist "empire."

Secretary Dulles envisaged a ten-nation collective defense force
to take “united action" to prevent a French defeat -- if necessary
before the Geneva Conference. Dulles and Admiral Radford were, at first,
inclined towards an early unilateral intervention at Dien Bien Phu, as
requested by the French (the so-called "Operation Vulture"). But Con-
gressional leaders indicated they would not support U.S. military action
without active allied participation, and President Eisenhower decided that
he would not intervene without Congressional approval. In addition to
allied participation, Congressional approval was deemed dependent upon
a public declaration by France that it was speeding up the timetable for
independence for the Associated States.

The U.S. was unable to gather much support for "united action"

except in Thailand and the Philippines. The British response was one

of hesitation in general, and flat opposition to undertaking military
action before the Geneva Conference. Eden feared that it would lead to
an expansion of the war with a high risk of Chinese intervention. More-
over, the British questioned both the U.S. domino principle, and the
belief that Indochina would be totally lost at Dien Bien Phu and through
negotiations at Geneva. As for the French, they were less interested in
"“ynited action" than in immediate U.S. military assistance at Dien Bien
Phu. Paris feared that united action would lead to the international-
ization of the war, and take control out of its hands. In addition, it
“would impede or delay the very negotiations leading towards a settlement
which the French increasingly desired. But repeated French requests for
direct U.S. intervention during the final agony of Dien Bien Phu failed
to alter President Eisenhower's conviction that it would be an error for
the U.S. to act alone. .

B-2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
