——— ae,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

need. not, as the Viet Minh had previously insisted, be preceded by a
political settlement. Hoan reportedly stated: "It is first necessary

to have a cease-fire. We do not pose 4 single prior political condition.
If, in the plan of M. Dong, political proposals precede those which con-
cern the cease-fire, it is solely a question of presentation..." 12/
Hoang Van Hoan's statement was confirmed the next day when Pham Van Dong,
speaking at the sixth restricted session, referred for the first time

to territory under Viet Minh control. Dong'*s proposals included specific
reference to areas under the control of each Vietnamese state; in regroup-
ing forces of the two sides, he suggested that territorial readjustments
also be made so that each side would be able to have complete economic
and administrative, as well as military, control. So as not to be mis-
understood, Dong further urged that a line of demarcation be drawn that
would be topographically suitable and appropriate for transportation and
communication within each state. 13/ Thus, quite contrary to French and
Vietnamese expectations, the Viet Minh had opened the way toward parti-
tion, and appeared willing to contemplate the creation, albeit temporary,
of separate zones of political control.

d. French Opposition to Partition Collapses

French support of GVN opposition to partition, which Bidault

‘upheld privately to Smith and Eden at Geneva, 14/ collapsed once the

new government of Pierre Mendes-France took over in mid-June. Mendes-
France, keenly aware of the tenor of French public anti-war opinion, was
far more disposed than his predecessor to make every effort toward achiev-
ing a reasonable settlement, and he quickly foresaw that agreement with
the Viet Minh was unlikely unless he accepted the concept of partition.
His delegate at Geneva, Jean Chauvel, and the new Commissioner General

for Indochina, General Paul Ely, reached the same conclusion. 15/

At a high-level meeting in Paris on 24 June, the new govern-
ment thoroughly revised the French negotiating position. The objectives
for subsequent talks, it was decided, would be: (1) the regroupment of
forces of both sides and their separation by a line at about the 18th
parallel; 16/ (2) the establishment of enclaves under neutral control
in the two zones, one for the French in the area of the Catholic bishoprics
at Phat Diem and Bui Chu, one for the Viet Minh at an area to be deter-
mined; (3) the maintenance of Haiphong in French hands in order to assist
in the regroupment. At this same meeting, it was also decided that, for
the purpose of psychological pressure on the Viet Minh, if not military
preparedness for future contingencies, France should announce plans to.
send. a contingent of conscripts (later determined as two divisions) to
Indochine. 17/

3. GVN Refuses to Accept French Leadership

a. Vietnamese are Stubborn and Unyielding

The State of Vietnam délegation at Geneva was determined.
to be intimidated neither by the DRV and its communist allies, nor by the

B-9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
