Qn
oy

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

, security; territory cleared of enemy influence; ve/NVA bases
eliminated; and enemy guerrillas, local forces, and main forces
destroyed. Barring any unforeseen change in enemy strategy, I
visualize our strategy for South Vietnam will remain essentially
the same throughout 1967...In summation, the MACV mission, which
is to assist GVN to defeat the VC/NVA forces and extend GVN
control throughout South Vietnam, prescribes our two principal
tasks. We must defeat the enemy through offensive operations
against his main forces and bases. We must assist the GVN to
gain control of the people by providing direct support of revol-
utionary development...Simultaneous accomplishment of these
tasks is required to allow the people of SVN to get on with the
Job of nation building. 14

Westmoreland closed his message by adding that Ambassador Lodge concurred
with the following comment:

I wish to stress my agreement with the attention paid to
this message to the importance of military support for RD.
After all, the main purpose of defeating the enemy through
offensive operations against his main forces and bases must
be to provide the opportunity through RD to get at the heart
of the matter, which is the population of South Vietnam. 15/

A possible interpretation of this message is that it is a reaction
both to a growing tendency to focus almost all attention on the pacifi-
cation effort, and to the on-going battle over who would control the RD
effort. General Westmoreland seemed to be saying that, while he fully
recognized the essential importance of pacification effort, we should not
lose sight of the importance of the mission performed by US/EW forces in
keeping the enemy main force units away from the areas undergoing paci-
fication. However, he did not want to restrict MACV only to fighting the
war against main force units. He indicated that some US/FW forces would
be used in direct support of RD activities, and recommended that the
ARVN division be left in the RD chain of command, keeping the RD effort
"militarized," and more susceptible to control through MACV. The
military's coolness to many of the recommendations of the Roles and
Missions Study is indicated by the fact that MACV did not forward the
study to CINCPAC until 26 September, while CINCPAC did not forward the
study to the JCS until 26 October.

However, Ambassador Lodge, on August 31, felt that he had finally 16/
achieved "the biggest recent American effort affecting Vietnam. ..giving
pacification the highest priority which it has ee had ~~ making it,
in effect, the main purpose of all our activities. He pointed ee
Westmoreland's "concept of military operations in South Vietnam," a
MACV proposal to put ARVN in support of pacification, and the report of
the Inter-Agency Roles and Missions Study Group as evidence. He did,

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
