Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho Chi Minh issued an "Appeal for General Insurrection" following the
August 16 conference:

".,.This is a great advance in the history of the struggle
waged for nearly a century by our people for their liberation.

"This is a fact that enraptures our compatriots and fills
me with great joy.

"However, we cannot consider this as good enough. Our
struggle will be a long and hard one. Because the Japanese are
defeated, we shall not be liberated overnight. We still have
to make further efforts and carry on the struggle. Only a united
struggle will bring us independence.

"The Viet Minh Front is at present the basis of the struggle
and solidarity of our people. Join the Viet Minh Front, support
it, make it greater and stronger!

"At present, the National Liberation Committee is, so to
speak, in itself our provisional government. Unite around it
and see to it that its policies and orders are carried out
throughout the country!

"In this way, our Fatherland will certainly win independence
and our people will certainly win freedom soon.

"Me decisive hour in the destiny of our people has struck.
Let us stand up with all our strength to free ourselves!

"Many oppressed peoples the world over are vying with each
other in the march to win back their independence. We cannot
allow ourselves to lag behind.

"Forward: Forward! Under the banner of the Viet Minh Front,
move forward courageously!” 30/

The hapless Bao Dai -- the first Vietnamese to govern a nominally
ited, independent nation in nearly a century -- on August 18, 1945,
dispatched to General de Gaulle of France the following poignant and
rophetic message:

"I address myself to the people of France, to the country
of my youth. I address myself as well to the nation's leader
and liberator and I wish to speak as a friend rather than as
Head of State.

"You have suffered too much during four deadly years not
to understand that the Vietnamese people, who have a history
of twenty centuries and an often glorious past, no longer wish,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-29
