Note Date
11 21 Jul 54

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Geneva Conference Declarations of GVN
On Partition On Elections

"Mr. Tran van Do (State of Viet-Nam) (Interpretation):
Mr. Chairman, the Delegation of the State of Viet-Nam when it
tabled its proposal, saw an armistice without a partition, even
provisional, of Viet-Nam through disarmament of all belligerent
forces after their withdrawal into perimeters as limited as
possible and by the establishment of a provisional control by
the United Nations on the whole of the territory, while the
re-establishment of order and peace would enable the Vietnamese
people to decide its fate through free elections.

"The Delegation of the State of Viet-Nam protests against the
fact that its proposal has been rejected without an examination,
a@ proposal which is the only one to reflect the aspirations of the
Vietnamese people. It requests urgently that the demilitarization
and neutralization of the Catholic communities, the Bishoprics
of the Delta in North Viet-Nam be at least accepted by this Con-
ference.

"It solemnly protests against the hasty conclusion of the
Armistice Agreement by the French and Vietminh High Commanders
only, whereas the French High Command does command Vietnamese
troops only through a delegation of powers given by the head of
the State of Viet-Nam, whereas especially many provisions of this
Agreement are of a nature to be seriously detrimental to the
political future of the Vietnamese people.

"Tt further solemly protests against the fact that this
Armistice Agreement abandons to Vietminh territories some of
which are still occupied by Vietnamese troops and which are,
nevertheless, fundamental to the defense of Viet-Nam against
a greater Communist expansion, and results practically even in
depriving the State of Viet-Nam from its right to organize its
defense by other means than by the maintenance of the foreign
army on its territory.

"Tt also solemnly protests against the fact that the French .
High Command was pleased to take the right without a preliminary
agreement of the Delegation of the State of Viet-Nam to set the
date of future elections, whereas we deal here with a provision
of an obviously political character. Consequently, the Govern-
ment of the State of Viet-Nam requests that this Conference note
that it does protest solemnly against the way in which the Armis-
tice has been concluded and against the conditions of this
Armistice which have not taken into account the deep aspirations
of the Vietnamese people.

"And the Government of the State of Viet-Nam wishes the Con-
ference to take note of the fact that it reserves its full freedom
of action in order to safeguard the sacred right of the Vietnamese
people to its territorial unity, national independence, and freedon.

B-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
