Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpts from Vietnam: A Dragon Embattled (Vol I: From Colonialism to
the Viet Minh) by Joseph Buttinger, 1967

1

Pages 406-408

But no one knew better than Ho Chi Minh that the struggle for
independence could not be conducted under the banner of Communism. The
establishment of an open dictatorship of their party would only have brought
about the collapse of the ingenious political edifice through which they
dominated the entire nationalist movement. The more the regime evolved
toward one-party rule, the greater became the need for democratic rhetoric
and ritual, and for a splendid facade of democratic institutions. The
constitution submitted to the Assembly was designed for this pose.

It was adopted, with 240 against 2 votes, on November 8 [ighs}.

*¥ * *

If the lofty principles of this constitution had no influence on the
political evolution of the Hanoi regime, the reason is not that the out-
break of the war several weeks later prevented the D.R.V.N. from realizing
the promise contained in its name. The Communists determined the nature
of the regime even more after the outbreak of the war than before,.and
as far as they were concerned, the purpose of the constitution was not to
create the basis for a democratic Hee anes It was their contention, in
Vietnam no less than in the “people's democracies" of Fastern Europe, that
the regime they had set up was democratic, was in fact a "higher form of
democracy" than existed in any Western state. Outsiders, and especially
people who believe that Communist political theory is basically dishonest,
find this hard to understand. But the democratic principles of the con-
stitution were laid down not merely as a means to camouflage the progressive
development of the regime toward a Communist-led one- party dictatorship.
These freedoms were meant for the entire people, to be denied only to

"reactionaries ," "traitors," "collaborators," "troublemakers," and other
"enemies of the people," in brief anyone whose political activities the
Communists considered harmful to the national cause, the political and
organizational custodian of which was the Viet Minh and later es Lien
Viet.

Even before the armed conflict spread over the entire country, the
Communists ‘felt perfectly justified in demanding that their nationalist
rivals exercise their political rights only in support of the Viet Minh
regime. Opposition to the Viet Minh was synonymous with acting against
the interests of the state. There is no denying that the Communists in-
troduced, radical democratic reforms such as Vietnam had never known before,
and. that they established almost every known type of democratic institu-
tion. But is is equally true that they had no compunction about imprison-
ing or even murdering people who tried to enjoy these reforms or use these
institutions to oppose the Viet Minh.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
C-23
