Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Tt should be mantione? thatthe necessity fo ; toa
(if 4% existed) has been Littlo understecd in Indochina by either ©
Erench oz VYistnamess and mach additional mistrust and suspicion of
Fronch motives has boen surendersds Thora hus also boen sovoro criti-
cisem of the rike-up of ths territorial assexnbdly~--tho Franch claining
thoy will net be adequately roprosented (16 ont of 64 mombors), and
the Vietnamese protesting against any Fronch reprosenmtation at alle

When (and if) the above a seribe2 process is completed, Eao
Dai arrivos in ‘Saigon anc the ee Dal agrosmont signed in

LF
Paris ser ee 8, 1949, goes into erfoct, subject to future ratificatioa.
The toxt has not yet beon published tut a resume was givon to ths
pross atter. the exchange of lotvbers and somo additional dotails were
royoalod by the governnont during the donate in tho Agsombly and by
High Comsiselonex PIGRON in a spsoch in Saigon on March 29.

It confirms the provisions of the Bai G'Along Agroement of
duno 5, 1948-~unity and indepondencs within the Franch Union, pro-
toction of french cultural and oconomic position and preferences
for French advisers and technicians--bus apparent) Ty g098 a
‘considerable way in settling tho many points left for future
nogotiation by that agresmont. Tho Victuan will have its om army
undor its a command excopt in tins of ware Frances will recoiva
miditary and naval basos with oxref pa! defined rights of con=

mpumications Tha Vietnam will have its own diploratic and consular
porvicd, but Viotnam missions i bs “postrictod to aoe tien ECASTS
Gian and Chinao Frances will sponsor a domand for adz lon, to Us

55
P ci

French citizens will remain sabhaes to French Inve Tho
an Indochineso custom's wiion and a joint currency tiod
francs seonomic and other matters affecting all of Indochina,
ineluding tho thorny and important question of control of tho.
Fogoral a a alae a railroads, postal services, avintion,
highways, eve--aro to bo discussed at a conisronca of Conbodia,
Laos and Vietnan in May or Juno of this yonre '

4
3 will t
wi) 2 Re

Vast

re 1°? Th ke Soiiere api tho agroonons contains many provisions
distinctly favorablo to tho Vict aan Hee Ee ee cae pe teeee ma:
preforrod not nee Tevend
tonal cloctions.

4

It is preasture to ¢
prasonry plan baroera the *%
seudicd and witil the Seruacesents for pate thd ati EUS i.
Cochinechina have boon successfully conplsteds (Thera are ruvors
aca mite that tho diohnard cole ee Ete in Paigon will atten
to rig tho oloctions -schoduied for April 10 with a hops to blot: L
“tho zokO for autonony or, moro likely, tho. vote for unien with the
ross of tho Viewnsn iu tho hones of achieving thoir nindiaicn objoetiy
of ie ae a4 auvoncmous Cochinchinga undoar Frosch controls) Bao
Dai. mast also form a government on his rovurn with much more prestige

z
Oud awshorivy.vhan vho presant XUAN resins.

Howiver, 2. Gad Tull texts: or cha A\groonins fe)
o p

° i
supp lomenuary agreements for its inolementstion spr

re Syn et aie j tale roasonabls
