Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

16

were pressing in for attack positions. At about this time, the boats weve
at a range of 6,000 yards from I/addow when the radar tracking indt-
cated that the contact had turned away and begun to open in range.
Torpedo noises were then heard by the Maddox's sonar. A report of
the torpedo noise was immediatel y passed to the Turner Joy by inter-
ship radio and both ships took evasive action to avoid the torpedo.

REPORTS OF EYEWIENESSES

A torpedo wake was then sighted passing abeam Turner Joy froin
aft to forward, approximately 300 feet to port on the same bearing
as that reported by Jaddox. This sighting was made by at least four
of Zurner Joy's topside personnel: the forward gun irector officer,
Lt. (jg.) John J. Barry, USNR; the port lookout, Edwin R. Sentel,
SN, USN ; by a seaman who was in the forward gun director with the -
director officer, Larry O. Litton, SN, USN; and by a seaman who
was operator of the after gun director, Roger N. Bergland, SN, USN.

At about 10:24 p.m., one target was taken under fire by Turner Joy.
Numerous hits were observed on this target and it disappeared from ail
radars. The commanding officer and other 7'urner Joy personnel ob-
served a thick column of black smoke from this ta rget.

Later, 10:47 p.m., during the atiack a searchlight was observed by
all signal brides and maneuvering bridge personnel including the
commanding oflicer of U.S.S. Zurner Joy. The beam of the searchlight
did not touch the ship, but was seen to swing in an are toward Z'urner
Joy and was immediately extinguished when aircraft from the combat
air patrol orbiting above tlfe ships approached the vicinity of the
searchlight. (Walter L. Shishim, QMCS. USN; Richard B. Johnson,
SM1, USN; Richard D. Nooks, QM 3, USN; Richard M. Bacino, SM2,
USN; and Gary D. Carroll, SM3, USN, stationed on the Turner Joy's
signal bridge all made written statements that they sighted the
searchlight.)

The silhouette of an attacking boat was seen by at least four Turner
Joy personnel when the boat came between the flares dropped by an
aircraft and the ship. When these four men were asked to sketch what
they had seen, they aceurately sketched P-t-type boats. (None of the
four had ever seen a picture of 2 P-4 boat before). (Donald V. Shar-
key, BM3, USN; Kenneth E. Garrison. SN, USN: Delner Jones, GMG
SN, USN, and Arthur B. Anderson, FT SN, USN, are the four per-
sonnel from the Turner Joy who sighted the boat.)

In addition to the above, a gunner’s mate second class stationed

aft of the signal bridge aboard U.S.S. /addox saw the outline of a
boat which was silhouetted by the light of a burst from the 3-inch
projectile fired at it. (Jose R. San Augustin GMG2, USN.)
“The commanding officer of Attack Squadron 52 from the Ticon-
deroga (Comdr. G. H. Edmondson, USN) and his wingman (Lt. J. A.
Burton), while flying at altitudes of between 700 and 1,500 feet in the
vicinity of the two destroyers at the time of the torpedo attack both
sighted oun flashes on tho surface of the water as well as light antiair-
craft bursts at their approximate altitude. On one pass over the two
destroyers, both pilots positively sighted a “snakey” high speed wake
1% miles ahead of the lead destroyer, U.S.S. Afaddow.

Two U.S. Marine Corps personnel who were manning machineguns
on U.S.S, Mfaddox saw lights pass up the port side of the ship, go out
