Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

United States should pursue a further shouldering aside of France.
Through the fall of 1954, France-U.S. relations worsened, and a
policy debate developed in Washington. Once again, military con-
Siderations emerged as paramount. The JCS were originally opposed

to the United States assuming responsibility for training the Army of
Vietnam. They took the position, however, that if political con-
Siderations dictated such a U.S. involvement "the Joint Chiefs of Staff
would agree to the assignment of a training mission to MAAG Saigon,
with safeguards against French interference with the U.S. training
mission." On October 26, 1954, the Secretary of Defense, acting on
behalf of the President, instructed the JCS to prepare a "long-range
program for the organization and training of a minimum number of free
Vietnam forces necessary for internal security." The development of
this plan and an appropriate working relationship with the French con-
tinued into 1955, and necessitated the dispatch to Vietnam of General
J. lawton Collins, with Ambassadorial status, to obtain a tri-partite
agreement acceptable in Saigon, in Paris, and in Washington. During
November 1954, the JCS expressed serious reservations about the success
of such a combined undertaking. Nevertheless, the NSC considered the
policy sound, and this judgment was confirmed from the field by
General Collins. Collins reported that:

It would be disastrous if the French Expeditionary
Corps would be withdrawn prematurely since otherwise
Vietnam would be overrun by an enemy attack before the
Manila Pact Powers could be enacted.

Collins recommended that the United States continue military aid to
France to "encourage the French to retain sufficient forces." In the
meantime, events in Vietnam seemed to support those who, like the. JCS,
continued to entertain strong reservations about the future of Ngo
Dinh Diem and his government. Diem managed to survive attempted coups
by army leaders, and succeeded in maintaining an unhappy peace with the
several armed factions of Cochinchina. But his political future
remained questionable at best. At the same time, the French mission
in Hanoi pressed hard to preserve French economic and cultural pre-
rogatives in North Vietnam, and certain French political leaders in
Paris spoke grandiloquently of a cooperative modus vivendi with the
DRV becoming a model for east-west relations -~- a disquieting message
for the U.S. Secretary of State and those who shared his convictions
within the Administration. Finally, parallel to these developments,
the Euperor Bao Dai, retaliating for Diem's vituperative political
campaign against him, actively sought to supplant Dien.

All the foregoing tension resolved to two central issues between
the United States and France. The first was the question of how and
by whom Vietnam's armed forces were to be trained. The second, and
more far-reaching, was whether Ngo Dinh Diem was to remain at the head
of Vietnam's government, or whether he was to be replaced by another

iit TOP SECRET - Sensitive
