Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

RESTRICTED

However, this is not intended to bar the expression of personal visws,
provided such views do not run counter to the laws of the United States,
the policy of the Administration or your instructions, There personal
views are properly expressed, they should be clearly identified as personal.

You will appreciate, I am sure, that the members of the Mission are
not authorized to offer any written or oral statement which might be
construed as committing this Government to a definite course of action or
which might involve an obligation to expend governmental funds not
previously appropriated and allocated.

You are reauested to comnunicate with the Chief of the United States
Mission in each country on your itinerary and to seek his advice and
counsel as circumstances warrant. lr. NeAfee of the Department, who has
been designated as one of your Advisers, may te Looked to for assistance
in your relations with the United States Missions and with the Department.

You are authorized to delegate to anothor member of the Mission all
authority held by you in the event of your inability to exercise the
functions of your position.

S ion arrangements for your
journey are contained in a Travel Crder which will be sent to you uncer
separate covers

It is expected that you will transmit by air pouch or cable preliminary
reports from each country visited, and at the conclusion of the Mission a
comorehensive report listing justifiable immediate projects, appraising
the local governments! attitudes tovard collaboration in anticipated
programs, and appraising the possibilities of a regional -approach to” the
implementation of programs to meet regional needs. lnelosed for your
convenience is the usual outline for conference reports, which, though
it will not quite fit your requirements, may nonetheless prove useful
as a convenient cnaecklist of a numoer of the items to be covered and the
format whicn is desirable in all reports to the Department, You may wish
to supplement this foriial report with a confidential report.

You and your colleasues undertake your responsibilities with the
assurance of my keen interest and wholehsarted support. I have every
confidence in the individual ability of the Mission members and in the
capacity of the Mission as a whole, under your able leadershin, to
reflect credit on. the United States in this important undertakings

Very truly yours,

aie a t\ cbt

Under Secretary . P

rmelosures?
1. Letter of appointment.
2. tline sor renorte .

RESTRICTED

287

