Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

decision was taken in the context of the successful amphibious invasion
of Nationalist-defended Hainan by a Communist Chinese army under General
Lin Piao -- with obvious implications for Indochina, and for Taiwan.

One week later, on May 8, the Secretary of State announced U.S. aid for
"the Associated States of Indochina and to France in order to assist them
in restoring stability and permitting these states to pursue their peace-
ful and democratic development." 23/ Sixteen days later, Bao Dai's
government and France were notified on May 24 of the U.S. intention to
establish an economic aid mission to the Associated States. As the North
Korean Army moved southward on June 27, 1950, President Truman announced
that he had directed "acceleration in the furnishing of military assistance
to the forces of France and the Associated States in Indochina..." 2h/

The crucial issue presented by the American decision to
provide aid to Indochina was who should be the recipient -- Bao Dai or
France -- and, hence, whose policies would U.S. aid support?

d. French Intransigence

While the U.S. was deliberating over whether to provide
economic and military assistance to Indochina in early 1950, negotiations
opened at Pau, France, among France and the Associated States to set the
timing and extent of granting autonomy. Had these talks led to genuine
independence for Bao Dai's regime, the subsequent U.S.-French relationship
would probably have been much less complex and significantly less acerbic.
As it was, however, the Pau accords led to little more independence than
had the Ha Long Bay or Elysee Agreements. Moreover, France's reluctance
to yield political or economic authority to Bao Dai was reinforced by its
proclivity to field strong-willed commanders, suspicious of the U.S.,
determined on a military victory, and scornful of the Bao Dai solution.
General Marcel Carpentier, Commander in Chief when the French applied for
aid, was quoted in the New York Times on March 9, 1950, as follows:

"I will never agree to equipment being given directly to
the Vietnamese. If this should be done I would resign within
twenty-four hours. The Vietnamese have no generals, no colonels,
no military organization that could effectively utilize the
equipment. It would be wasted, and in China the United States
has had enough of that." 25/

(1) 1950-1951: De Lattre and _"Dynamisme"

Carpentier's successor, High Commissioner-Commander in
Chief General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, arrived in December, 1950,
following the severe setback of the autumn. De Lattre electrified the
discouraged French forces like General Ridgway later enheartened U.S.
forces in Korea. De Lattre saw himself as leading an anti-communist
crusade. He calculated that he could win a decisive victory within
fifteen months in Vietnam, and "save it from Peking and Moscow." He
deprecated the idea that the French were still motivated by colonialism,
and even told one U.S. newsman that France fought for the West alone: -

A-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
