C =f |

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fwo important items as far as the build-up was concerned were the
guidance to "assume and act to deploy combat units as provided under
Case 1, but without a reserve call-up," and the emphasis on the serious
problems which a reserve call-up would present (in spite of the insis-
tence that the reserve call-up was a "still-open question").

4, Results of the CINCPAC Planning Conference

On 12 February, the results of the CINCPAC Conference were
published. 46/

The concept of operations for 1966 had been more completely
spelled out. The three basic military objectives had by this time grown
to four. Now there were two separate objectives,

1. To extend GVN dominion, direction, and control over
SVN, and

2. To defeat the VC and PAVN forces in ARVN and force
their withdrawal,

instead of the old task which combined both of these. In achieving the
objective for extending GVN domination, US forces" tasks were very care-
fully spelled out as "assisting the RVNAF in the conduct of clearing and
securing the civic action operations...assist and reinforce other US
mission agencies, and assist the RVNAF to defend major political, eco-
nomic, food producing population centers." ‘The object of defeating the
ve and PAVN forces required more direct action such as conducting sus-
tained coordinated offensive operations against the enemy, conducting
air offensives, raids and special operations against enemy war zones and
base areas to render them unusable. In general, "US military operations
are aimed at creating operation environment and opportunity for the GVN
to gain control and establish security of main food producing areas in
order to feed the people, deny food to the enemy, bolster the economy,
to cause the enemy to import or fight for food." In explaining the US
emphasis on search and destroy, the memorandum stated that such opera-
tions “against VC/PAVN forces and base areas attrite VC/PAVIN main forces
and destroy VC base areas and in-country supplies. These operations,
although contributory to, are not a part of the rural construction effort,
per se, but are constituted concomitantly with it. It is clear that a
known and expected VC/PAVIN build-up, the prime focus of combat capable
units of US/FWMAF and RVNAF forces must be directed to the search and
destroy effort."

CINCPAC conceded that:
This concept of employment of forces is of.long standing;

however, the lack of sufficient ARVN regular forces for offen-
sive operations plus the increasing VC strength have resulted

3} TOP SECREH? - Sensitive
