Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the piastre disbursal difficulties on inherited French budget practices,
and promised to pressure the province chiefs further on the matter. There
was talk about incompetent personnel within the GVN and of the problems of
replacing them. x

4. The Honolulu Conference of 30 May 1964

The next landmark of policy formation for Vietnam was the Honolulu
Conference of 30 May 1964. On 26 May, the President sent out to Lodge
his call for the Honolulu Conference:

I have been giving the most intense consideration to the whole
battle for Southeast Asia, and I have now instructed Dean Rusk,
Bob McNamara, Max Taylor and John McCone to join Felt in Honolulu
for a meeting with you and a very small group of your most senior
associates in Southeast Asia to review for my final approval a
series of plans for effective action.

I am sending you this message at once to give you private
advance notice because I hope this meeting can occur very soon -
perhaps on Monday. Dean Rusk will be sending you tomorrow a
separate cable on the subjects proposed for the meeting, and
Bob McNamara will put a plane at your disposal for the trip...

Other parts of the message referred to matters related to impending changes
in the mission in Saigon - the retirement of General Harkins and his re-
placement by General Westmoreland and the strengthening of the civilian side
of the country team. 95/

The promised policy guidance followed promptly. It constituted both
an appraisal of the current situation and a statement of the needs -
flowing from that appraisal - that it seemed evident had to be met, along
with some proposals for meeting those needs.

Ie You will have surmised from yesterday's telegram from
the President and the Secretary that we here are fully aware
that gravest decisions are in front of us and other governments
about free world's interest in and commitment to security of
Southeast Asia. Our point of departure is and must be that we
cannot accept overrunning of Southeast Asia by Hanoi and Peiping.
Full and frank discussion of these decisions with you is purpose
of Honolulu meeting...

2. President will continue in close consultation with Con~
gressional leadership (he met with Democratic leadership and Senate
Republicans yesterday) and will wish Congress associated with him
on any steps which carry with them substantial acts and risks of
escalation. At that point there will be three central questions:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

76
