1g

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

fwo United States Army helicopter companies arrived here today.
The helicopters, to be flown and serviced by United States troops,
are the first direct military support by the United States for South
Vietnam's war against Communist guerrilla forces.

The craft will be assigned to the South Vietnamese Army in the
field, but they will remain under United States Army control and
operation,

At least 33 H-21C twin-rotor helicopters, their pilots and
ground crews, an estimated total of 400 men, arrived aboard the
Military Sea Transportation Service aircraft ferry Core. 30/

i tba bs irst fruits"
The Times story ended by describing the force as _the firs
of the Taylor Mission, with more to come, The Times did not find the story
important enough to put it on the front page.

A day later, the Times published a story about the ICC reaction to the
arrival of the helicopters, It began:

The International Control Commission for Vietnam was reported
today to be considering whether to continue functioning here in
the face of an increase in United States assistance to South
Vietnam's struggle against Communist guerrillas.

The Commission, made up of representatives of India, Canada,
and Poland, has been holding emergency sessions since the arrival
here yesterday of a United States vessel loaded with at least 33
helicopters and operating and maintenance crews. 31/

A few paragraphs later, the dispatch noted that:

With the arrival yesterday of the Core, 4 former escort carrier,
bearing the helicopters, four single-engine training planes and
about 400 men, the United States military personnel here now are
believed to total about 1,500. Many more are expected, 32/

Again, the Times ran the story on an inside page.
Finally, on the 15th, a formal exchange of letters between Presidents

Diem and Kennedy was published, announcing in general terms a stepped-up
U.S. aid program for Vietnam,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
148
