Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

suggest an unfortunate failure to come to grips with any of the basic
issues concerning pacification, and, moreover, a skillful performance
by the GVN to please their American hosts. Thang's statement to the
President after the working session, for example, with its emphasis on
rurdl electrification, handicrafts, and the need for "materials and
cement" -- none of which were major GVN concerns at that time -- can
best be explained, in retrospect, by the Vietnamese desire to emphasize
those things they felt the Secretary of Agriculture, the co-chairman of
the ‘American working group, was most interested in.

Although the inner workings of the conference do not seem to have
had much importance on the development of the pacification effort, a
record does remain of the "rural construction working group," and it
deserves 2 brief summary. The meeting is useful to examine not because
of its ultimate importance, which was marginal, but because it provides
us with a record of a type of discussion between Americans and Vietnamese
which has been replayed constantly since (and before). To some weary
participants, the very words used have seemed to be unchanged since 1962.

A summary cannot, unfortunately, recapture the flavor of confusion
which surrounds the memorandum for the record (A-2254, February 15, 1966).
The meeting began with a discussion of terminology (see footnote on
"revolutionary deve lopment") in which it was decided to use the phrase
"social construction" in place of pacification in English. Then, accord-
ing to the Memon enaan, RmenyOne lapsed back into Meine the phrase
"pacification."

The American representatives then pressed the issue of the role of
the province chief, implying strongly that they thought the province
chiefs should have more power and autonomy. The Vietnamese, led by
General Co, neatly answered this issue, “referring to the establishment
of Rural Construction Councils and Division and Corps levels, where such
matters as the disposition and use of military forces are arbitrated and
decided upon." When Leonard Unger, asked if the military commanders would
be committed to providing the necessary military forces for the pacifica-
tion effort, "General Co again responded, saying that in the past senior
commanders tended to pull troops away from Provincial control for search
and destroy operations. This is a natural desire on the part of these
commanders who tend to feel that this is a more important role for such
troops. Now, however, their missions have changed. These senior comman-
ders are now directly involved in the pacification program, are members
of the respective Rural Construction Councils...In other words, things
have changed for the better. Ambassador Unger continued to pursue his
point, stressing our concern that vestiges of the past may still remain.
General Thang re-entered the discussion, explaining that the GVN now has
a new chain of command, clear and clean from Saigon to the Corps to the
Division to the Province to the District; there is only one channel in
the country and it is a military channel.,.Still on the same subject,

k3 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
