Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

TI. THE LONG ROAD TO PLEIKU--A Retrospective View

A. 1964: Year of Political and Military Decline

The year 1964 was marked by a gradua] American awakening to the
fact that the Viet Cong were winning the war in South Vietnam. Almost
uninterrupted political upheaval in Saigon was spawning progressive mili-
tary dissolution in the countryside. Constant changes within the Vietnamese
leadership were bringing GVN civil administration into a state of disarray
and GVN military activities to a near-standstill. ARVN forces were becoming
more and more defensive and demoralized. At the same time, the communists
were visibly strengthening their support base in laos, stepping up the rate
of infiltration of men and supplies into South Vietnam, and mounting lerger
and more aggressive attacks. The GVN was still predominant, though not
unchallenged, in the urban population centers; there were also a few areas
where traditional local power structures (the Hoa Hao, the Cao Dai, etc.)
continued to exercise effective authority. But the rest of the country
was slipping, largely by default, under VC control. By the end of 1964,
all evidence pointed to a situation in which a final collapse of the GVN
appeared probable and a victorious consolidation of VC power a distinct
possibility.

Ironically, it was left to Senator Fulbright to state the harsh
realities in terms which set the tone for much of Administration thinking
as it was to emerge in the months to come -- though his views then were
hardly consistent with the opposition role he was increasingly to take later
on. As early as March 1964, in a celebrated speech entitled "Old Myths and
New Realities" he observed that "the hard fact of the matter is that our
bargaining position is at present a weak one; and until the equation of
advantage between the two sides has been substantially altered in our favor,
there can be little prospect of a negotiated settlement."

B. Evolution of a New Policy

With the growing realization that the ally on whose behalf the
United States had steadily deepened its commitment in Southeast Asia was
in a near state of dissolution, Washington launched a protracted reassess-
ment of the future American role in the war and began a determined search
for new pressures to be mounted against the communist enemy, both within and
outside of South Vietnam. High level deliberations on alternative U.S.
courses of action in Southeast Asia were started as early as March 1964,
and a military planning process was set in motion in which much attention
was given to the possibility of implementing some sort of pressures or
reprisal policy against North Vietnam.

The first of these planning efforts, authorized by the President
on 17 March 1964 (NSAM 288), led to the development of CINCPAC OPIAN 37-64,
a three-phase plan covering operations against VC infiltration routes in
laos and Cambodia and against targets in North Vietnam. Phase I provided
for air and ground strikes against selected targets in Laos, together with

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
