Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

copy of the Kuomintang, or the Indochinese Communist Party (IcP) of

the Comintern, headed by Russian-trained Ho Chi Minh. In Cochinchina,
however, there emerged a number of nationalist movements peculiar to

that region, or principally based on that region. Saigon, for example,
developed a range of leftist movements competitive with the ICP,

including two Trotskyite parties, as well as a number of VNQDD splinter
movements, and a politically active gangster fraternity, the Binh Xuyen.
But the important differences were in the countryside, where millions

of Vietnamese joined wholly Cochinchinese religious sects which propagated
xenophobic nationalism, established theocracies, and fielded armed forces.
French and Japanese policy had deliberately fostered conflict among these
several factions to the extent that Cochinchina was, in 1954, literally
fractioned among the religious sects, the Binh Xuyen, and the Viet Minh.
While by 1954 the Viet Minh dominated Annam and the Highlands, control

of Cochinchina eluded them, for all their ruthless efficiency.

1. The Binh Xuyen

Saigon itself in 1954 was under the rule of the Binh Xuyen,
a secret society of brigands evolved from the Black Flag pirates which
had for generations preyed on the city's commerce. u/ The Binh Xuyen
ethos included a fierce - albeit ecletic - nationalism. They collab-
orated with the Japanese during World War II, and in September, 1945,
led the savage attack against the French in Saigon which marked the start
of the Franco-Viet Minh War. The Binh Xuyen leader, Le Van (Bay ) Vien,
subsequently contracted an alliance with the Viet Minh, allied his 1300
soldiers with their guerrillas, and served for a time as the Viet Minh
deputy commander for Cochinchina and one of its chief sources of funds.
Bay Vien's refusal to assassinate certain Viet Minh-condemned Vietnamese
intellectuals reputedly stirred Viet Minh misgivings, and called the
Binh Xuyen favorably to the attention of the National United Front, an
anti-communist, Viet nationalist group then operating out of Shanghai.
In 1947, Bay Vien was persuaded to cooperate with the National United
Front. Informed, the Viet Minh invited him to the Plain of Reeds in an
attempt to capture him. Bay Vien escaped, and thereupon threw in his
lot with the French and the State of Vietnam, accepting a commission as
the first colonel of the Vietnamese National Army. 5/ Bay Vien after-
wards paid Bao Dai what Colonel Iansdale termed "a staggering sun" for
control of gambling and prostitution in Cholon, and of the Saigon-Cholon
police. The French accepted the arrangement because Bay Vien offset the
Viet Minh threat to Saigon. By 1954, Bay Vien was operating "Grande
Monde," a gambling slum in Cholon; "Cloche d'Or," Saigon's preeminent
gambling establishment; the "Noveautes Catinat," Saigon's best depart-
ment store; a hundred smaller shops; a fleet of river boats; and a
brothel, spectacular even by Asian standards, known as the Hall of
Mirrors. Besides a feudal fief south of Saigon, he owned an opium
factory and distribution system, and held substantial interests in fish,
charcoal, hotels, and rubber plantations. Besides the police apparatus
and other followers numbering 5000 to 8000, he had same 2500 soldiers

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
