Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Special Techniéal and Economic Mission which will
discharge thé responsibilities of the Government of

the United States of America under the present Agree-
ment and upon appropriate notification from the Govern-
ment of the United States of America will consider this
Special Mission and its personnel as part of the
Diplomatic Mission of the United States of America in
Vietnam for the purpose of enjoying the privileges

and immunities accorced to that Diplomatic Mission and
its personnel of comparable rank. The Government of
Vietnam will further give full cooperation to the
Special Mission, including the provision of facilities
necessary for observation and review of the carrying
out of this Agreement including the use of assistance
furnished under it.

ARTICLE V

. 1. This Agreement shall take effect upon notifica-
tion by the Government of Vietnam to the Government

of the United States of America that all necessary

legal requirements: in connection with the conclusion

of this Agreement by the Government of Vietnam have

been fulfilled.[1] This Agreement shall continue in
force until the date agreed upon by the two Governments
or may be terminated three months after a written noti-
fication has been given by either of the two Governments.

2, The Annex to this Agreement forms an integral
part thereof.

3. This Agreement shall be registered with the
Secretary General of the United Nations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorized
Bor the purpose, have signed the present Agreement.

DONE AT SAIGON this Seventh day of September, 1951
in duplicate, in each of the English, French, and
Vietnamese languages, all texts authentic except that
in the case of divergencies, the English and. French
texts shall govern. !

“For the Government. For the Government
of the ‘ , of
United States of America Vietnam
Edmund A. Gullion Nguyen~Khac-Ve
[seal]

lsept. 7, 1951.

L51
