Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

one

~ SECURITY INFORMATION

“e -
re

them with adequate intelligence which is vital to the success-
ful conduct of ope rations in Indochina. If this is accomplished
and if the Naverre conecp © is vigorously pursued militarily in
Indochina and given wi noleheart tod political support in France,

is Goes offer a promise of military success sufficient to warrant
appropriate additional U.S. aid required to assist. U.S. support
or the Navarre concept shoud be based on needs of the Frenca
Union Forces in Indochina for additional equipment necessary

to implement the organization of the "Battle Corps" envisaged

by the Navarre concent and necessary support of the planned ex-
pansion of indisenous forces, such heeds. to be screened by the
Military Assistance Advisory Group in Indochina. in addition,

to improve the chances of success, this support should include
continued close liaison and coordination with French military
authoritics together with friendly but firm encouragement and
advice where indicated.

: 2 furthe race of the O'Daniel Mission the Joint Chiefs
£ Sta: are reccivins Frogress Reports from Indochina. Infor-=
mation Po elved from Indochine indicates the French are not
pursuing reements reached betwoen General O'paniel and
saeral Navarre.{ineluding the Navarve S$Oncept) as vigorously .

par pis ye Came ot tl VA

28 exncetcd by General O'Daniel and as contemplated by him in
> reports state that (a) the French have

Ris renort, Prozress

"no plans for a general fall offensive beyond limited objec~
tive operations desicned to keep the enemy off balance”, (bd}
scoVsanizavion into regiments and division-size units Nis still
n the planning stages", (c)} there is "no sense of urgency in

the trainings of senior Vietnamese commanders ana staff officers"

(<) the organization of a training command is awaiting the solu
nm é i

gion of "nolitiedl problems" and (e) the “orzanization of the

saphibious plan has not gone beyond the planning stages",

In light of the apparent slowness of the Freneh in follow~
the Navarre ¢Gneept and other agreoments reached between
General Naverre and General O'Daniel, the doint Chicts of Steff
bel eve that additional U.Ss. a should be conditioned UBOR
continued ‘implementation of French support,.demonstration of  ~"
French intent by actual performance in Indochina, and continued:
French willingness to receive a nd act upon U.S. esa edviee,
F 11a be urged at all levels to : parece e and :

<5 co m1 bem ay! i’
ee tae Hvench Sho
’
iL

he Navarre “eonceps to the maximun x He

fs
eee
ti i3f

veel

ARTWUR RADFORD,
Chndrban.
Joint Chiefs of ree
yard

4 1 Set
ene INFO

Hy H
;

a"

ahi, a

A

i

For th e Joint oe of § State bare

VATION

F248 Eat gal Fal We a

ty
