Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

| OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES NS a
tes . WASHINGTON 25, D.C, Cou AA |

22 August 1945

t

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE:

The OSS ‘representative in Kunming has transmitted the following
information concerning the French attitude toward the Indo-Chi-~
nese Provisional Government. The Provisional Government was the
subject of our two memoranda of 21 Ausust.

The French Government has decided to adopt a passive diplomatic
attitude toward the reoccupation of Indo-China because of their
inability to make an entry with a powerful show of arms. A com-
mittee of three has been appointed by the French Government in
Paris, composed _of the chie? of the Kunming DGER /french Intel-
ligence Service/, the Minister of Colonies, and the Administra-
tor General of Colonies. Its mission is to contact Annanite
leaders and negotiate with them. on terms favorable to the Indo- °
Chinese, according to Major Sainteny, who will represent the
committee in Hanoi. The French policy will be one of liberal
administration in the capacity of advisors to the Indo-Chinese
Provisional Government, tobe established by the Kuomintang An-
namite and the Vietminh, which together form a commitiee of na-

tional liberation. (The Vietminh is a 100% Communist party, with —

a membershio of approximately 20% of the active political native
element. The Kuomintang Party comprises six minority parties and
a seore of independent ones.) The French Committee has been
charsed with the task of negotiating directly with Indo-Chinese
leadars and deciding on the best modus operandi. It has full
powers of signing treaties in the name of France. The committee,
will in turn report to Paris, which retains the prerogative of
making minor amendments to the general agreement. Annonite lead-
ers in Kunming and representatives of the Central Liberation Com-
mittee recently from Hanoi, .have expressed a desire to bring
Imgin /Annam?/ in Indo-China under the status of an Anerican
protectorate, and are hoping that the US will intercede wich

the United Nations for the exclusion of the French, as well as
Chinese, from the reoccupation of Indo-China.

LG
