Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

types of targets which would provide the greatest psychological benefits
---' Destructive results and military utility were to be strictly
secondary considerations. Package Two was to add 4 to 6 U.S. aircraft
to afford protective cover and incorporate action against certain North
Vietnamese coastal targets above the 19th Parallel. This package was
intended to begin approximately 30 days following initiation of the
first, although the instructions cautioned that the plans should be
"prepared to provide for an indefinite period” of operations under

Package One. 165/

MACV's new proposal for maritime operations was submitted on
5 December, with proposals for psychological operations and aerial
resupply/reinforce missions following close behind. On the lOth, appro-
val for the latter two was communicated back to the field. At the time,
the MAROPS proposals were still under consideration within the JCS. 166/
On the 12th, the JCS sutmitted their two-package proposal. Included in
their first 30-day package were coastal bombardment of radar sites,
barracks, and Pf boat bases plus a maritime equivalent of aerial armed
route reconnaissance. Patrol boats would make "fire sweeps” along the
coast against "targets of opportunity." In addition, upon their return
from bombardment missions, it was proposed that the GVN Pr boats attempt
the capture of NVN junks and SWATOW craft. With the single exception of
the coastal fire sweeps, all of these initial package operations were
approved by OSD, and instructions were issued to implement the initial
increment of such operations on or about 15 December. 167/

In accord with the instructions initially issued regarding inten-
sified maritime operations, OSD decisions on the proposed second package
were deferred. The JCS indicated that the addition of U.S. air cover,
and the necessary command and control procedures needed to support such
operations, could be implemented on or about 15 January. They went on
to recommend that if this were decided, the "maritime operations should
be surfaced...prior to /implementation of] Package Two." 168/

The JCS were disconcerted over disapproval of the fire sweeps
along the North Vietnamese coast. . However, their concern stemmed not so
much from the lack of support for those particular operations as from
their view that the disapproval removed from the package the only signi-
ficant intensification beyond the level already attained before the
President's Phase One decision. At a Principals meeting on 19 December,
Acting JCS Chairman, General Harold K. Johnson, pointed out that with the
modifications now made to it, the 3h.A program was, in effect, not inten-
sified at all. Moreover, as discussion revealed, seasonal sea conditions
were now so severe that no maritime operation had been completed sucess-
fully during the previous three weeks. 169/ In effect, therefore,. the
"intensified" December schedule of approved maritime operations still
remained to be implemented as the month drew to a close.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
