Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

54

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

secondly, only such massive infusions of firepower in the North and man-
power in the South as they proposed could possibly achieve our war
termination objectives "in the shortest time with the least cost" and
this’ could not be done unless we mobilized. Other arguments emerged

in discussions. There were those who feared the move because of the ~
inherent uncertainties about public reaction. To this the Chiefs
replied that mobilization had traditionally unified the country, and

it would also provide a strong indication of our national resolve --

an important message to relay to Hanoi, and one in which Westmoreland
as a field commander was also interested. Regardless, the issue loomed
as the ceiling figure in the majority of ground-force strategy delibera~
tions -~ it appeared that the level was. periodically studied, possibly
negotiated, but always there -- the "Plimsoll line." 84/

(6) Public disenchantment with the war was growing, and this
was being manifested in diverse ways. On the "hawk" side powerful
political figures (and many lesser ones) were increasingly vocal in
their opposition to bombing restraints and restrictive force levels.
Senator Stennis was in the vanguard of this group. On the other side,
public and private figures alike were energetically working to create a
genuine political war issue and to generate palatable alternative policies
for the upcoming Presidential elections in 1968. Feeding a less focused
sense of public dissatisfaction was an increasing awareness of the oppor-
tunity costs of the war in terms of national resources -- men, money and
attention ~- denied to domestic programs. As the defense slice of the
budget hovered near the eighty billion dollar mark, the public realized
it was "paying more and liking it less." There were strong inclinations
to "paying less" as long as the voter was resigned to liking it less.

The press was moving beyond the bounds of its traditional
adversary relationship vis-a-vis the Administration and assuming a leading
role in catalyzing the swell of public opposition and questioning about
the war. Acute even early on in the war, the press opposition intensified
and expanded as the divergence of official public pronouncements on the
war and what reporters and their sources saw on the ground increased.

(7) Failure is in the truest sense an orphan and as the sense
of futility and self-doubt about achieving our objectives in Vietnam
heightened, the architects of our military ground strategy found them-
selves increasingly isolated. The official base of support for the
MACV strategy narrowed as more alternatives to it were seriously examined
in Washington, This tended not only to aggravate a communications prob-
lem which had always hindered political-militery planning, but it placed
COMUSMACV-CINCPAC on the defensive, creating an information and planning
bias (from those sources) toward protection, justification and continua-

‘tion of present programs.

(8) Finally, we had a field commander facing a strategic
dilemma with no high prospect of Satisfactory resolution. If it had

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
