Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"TJ want to make it clear to the American people and to all of the
world thet ell we want in Laos is peace and not war, a truly neutral
government and not a cold war pawn, a settlement concluded at the con-
ference table and not on the battlefield. bs

eR

Mon, © Mie President, there appears to be some national unawareness of
the importance of a free Laos to the security of the United States and to
the individual American. Could you spell out your views on that a little
further?

"a, ‘Well, quite obviously geographically Laos borders on Thailand,
which is, to which the United States has treaty obligations under the :
SEATO agreement of 1954, it borders on South Vietnam - it borders on
Vietnam - to which the United States has very close ties, and also which
is a signatory of the SEATO pact.

"The aggression against Laos itself was referred to in the SEATO agree-
ment, so that given this, the nature of the geography, its location the
commitments which the United States and obligations which the United States
has assumed towards Laos as well as the surrounding countries - as well as
other signatories of the SEATO pact - it's quite obvious thet if the Com-
munists were able to move in and dominate this country, it would endanger
the security of all, and the peace of all of Southeast Asia.

"And as a member of the United Nations and as a signatory to the SEATO
pact, and as a country which is concerned with the strength of the cause
of freedom around the world, that quite obviously affects the security of
the United States.”

6. President Kennedy's Special Message to Congress on the Defense Budget
March 28, 1961, Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy; 1961 » 229:
x * *

"The strength and deployment of our forces in combination with those
of our allies should be sufficiently powerful and mobile to prevent the
steady erosion of the Free World through limited wars; and it is this role
that should constitute the primary mission of our overseas forces. WNon-
nuclear wars, and sub-limited or guerrilla warfare, have since 1945 con-
stituted the most active and constant threat to Free World security. Those
units of our forces which are stationed overseas, or designed to fight
overseas, can be most usefully oriented toward deterring or confining those
conflicts which do not justify and must not lead to a general nuclear attack.
In ‘the event of a major aggression that could not be repulsed by conventional
forces, we must be prepared to teke whatever action with whatever weapons
are appropriete. But our objective now is to increase our ebility to con-
fine our response to non-nuclear weapons, and to lessen the incentive for

C-7
