Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"It is as important to deter this type of aggression in Southeast
Asia now as it was to defeat it in Greece 19 years ago. The aggression
against Greece produced the Truman Doctrine, a declaration of a general
policy of assisting other free nations who were defending themselves
against external attacks or threats....

"THE ‘WHY’ OF OUR COMMITMENT

"In the discussion of our commitment in.Southeast Asia, three
different aspects are sometimes confused--why we made it, how we made
it, and the means of fulfilling it.

"The 'why’ was & determination that the peace and security of that
area are extremely important to the security of the United States. That
determination was made first before the Korean war by President Truman on
the basis of protracted analysis in the highest councils of the Govern-
ment. The problem was reexamined at least twice during his administration
and at intervals thereafter. And the main conclusion was always the same.
It was based on the natural resources and the strategic importance of the
area, on the number of nations and peoples involved, more than 200 million,
as well as on the relationship of Southeast Asia to the world situation
as a whole and to the prospects for a durable peace....

"pHE 'HOW' OF OUR COMMITMENT

"The ‘how’ of the commitment consists of various acts and utter-
ances by successive Presidents and Congresses, of which the most solemn
is the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, signed in 1954 and
approved by the Senate in early 1955 with only one dissenting vote.

I do not find it easy to understand how anyone could have voted for
that treaty--or even read it--without realizing that it was a genuine
collective defense treaty.

"Tt says in article IV that each party recognizes that ‘aggression
by means of armed attack in the treaty area'--which by protocol included
the nations which came out of French Indochina--'would endanger its own
peace and safety, and agrees that it will in that event act to meet the
common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes.' And, in
_ his testimony before the Foreign Relations Committee, Secretary of State

Dulles said specifically that this clause covered an armed attack 'by the
regime of Ho Chi Minh.' There was never any doubt about it when this
treaty was signed. Article IV binds each party individually; it does not
require a formal zollective finding. And that too was made plain when
the treaty was under consideration and has been reiterated on various
oceasions since then.

"Now the assertion that we have only recently discovered the SEATO
Treaty is just untrue. JI have referred to it frequently myself, begin-
ning with a public statement in Bangkok in March 1961 that the United
States would live up to its obligations under that treaty and would

D-62
