Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

24.
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

or two months ago would have hesitated to say anything critical
of Diem, now explode in angry denunciation of the man, his family,
and his methods. =

And after a page of details, Jorden sums up with:

Intrigue, nepotism and even corruption might be accepted,
for a time, if combined with efficiency and visible progress.
When they accompany administrative paralysis and steady deteri-
oration, they become intolerable. 26/

But the summary paper, under the heading of "The Assets of South Viet-
name,” lists:

With all his weakmesses, Diem has extraordinary ability,
stubbornness, and guts.

Despite their acute frustration, the men of the Armed Forces
and the administration respect Diem to a degree which gives
their grumbling (and perhaps some plotting) a somewhat half-
hearted character; and they are willing -- by and large -- to
work for him, if he gives them a chance to do their jobs. 27/

The military annex contains this summary comment on the South Vietnamese
Army:

The performance of the ARVN is disappointing and generally is
characterized by a lack of aggressiveness and at most levels is
devoid of a sense of urgency. The Army is short of able young
trained leaders, both in the officer and NCO ranks. The basic
soldier, as a result, is poorly trained, inadequately oriented,
lacking in desire to close with the enemy and for the most part
unaware of the serious inroads communist guerrillas are making
in his country. 28/

But the main paper, again in the summary of South Vietnamese assets,
reports that the South Vietnamese regulars are “of better quality than the
Viet Cong Guerrillas." 29/

The point is not that the summary flatly contradicts the appendices.
For example, the statement about the superior quality of ARVN, compared to
the Viet Cong, is qualified with the remark "if it can bring the Communists
to engagement," and can be explained to mean only that the more heavily
armed ARVN could defeat a VC force in a set-piece battle. But the persistent
tendency of the summary is to put Saigon's weaknesses in the best light, and
avoid anything that might suggest that perhaps the U.S. should consider
limiting, rather than increasing, its commitments to the Diem regime, or
alternatively face up to a need to openly take over the war.

104. .
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
