Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

“words “interdict supplies as effectively as the other alternatives,
would cost the least in pilot's lives and would be consistent with
effort to move toward negotiations." 39/

Implicit_in the recommendations submitted by Vance and McNaughton
on 12 June was the conviction that nothing short of toppling the Hanoi
regime would pressure North Vietnam to settle so long as they believed
they had a chance to win the "war of attrition" in the South. They
judged that actions great enough to topple the Hanoi regime would put
the United States into a war with the Soviet Union and/or China. Further-
more a shift to Alternative B could probably be timed and handled in such
&@ way as to gain politically while not endangering the morale of our
fighting men. In their recommendations, Vance and McNaughton were in
agreement with Mr. Nitze, Mr. Brown and Mr. Helms in that none recommended
Alternative A. Mr. Witze, Secretary of the Navy at the time, joined
with Vance and McNaughton in recommending B; Dr. Brown, Secretary of the
Air Force preferred C; while the Director of the Central Intelligence
Agency, Mr. Helms did not make a specific recommendation but stated that
the CIA believed that none of the alternatives was capable of decreasing
Hanoi's determination to persist in the war or of reducing the flow of
goods sufficiently to effect the war in the South. 4o/

The 12 June Draft Presidential Memorandum only momentarily diverted
attention from the question of the ground force increases which it so
skillfully skirted. However, it achieved one important purpose. It
had crystallized opinion and also marshalled an impressive array of
opposition against any significant expansion of the bombing for the time
being, and reflected a surprising turn toward objectives much different
than those originally stated in NSAM 288, anachronisms pursued in virtual
isolation by the Chiefs.

Another argument against significant increases of forces in South-
east Asia came from the financial side of the Department of Defense.
Balance of payment expenditures associated with the then current level
of Southeast Asia hostilities was running about $1.35 billion per year
above calendar year 1964 levels. If the effect of increased deployments
were proportional, then a 25% increase in deployment would mean approxi-
mately $350 million dollars annual increase. However, as a later memoran-
dum pointed out, the actual effect was not necessarily proportional. On
the one hand there were two forces that would cause the increase to be
greater than proportional, such as the increased demand leading to an
increase in the prices of foreign products and, as demonstrated earlier
,in 1966, increased DOD expenditures had an effect on the domestic economy
that tended to hurt the trade balance in that it caused inflation. On
the other hand, and partially offsetting these two forces in the upward
direction, there was some fraction of DOD gross IBP expenditures returned
to the U.S. via increased exports to the benefitting nations. But this
feedback was conservatively estimated at not more than 25%. Whatever the

. 190 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
