Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- The several "National Liberation Associations"
-- The Indochinese Communist Party (ICP)

Beginning in October, 1940, the Central Committee of the ICP had withdrawn
its specifically communist slogans (e.g., "To confiscate landlords' lands
and distribute it to the tillers," was toned down to "Confiscation of the
land owned by traitors for distribution to the poor farmers.") and had be-
gun instead to emphasize “national liberation." 15/ “Within the Viet Minh,
"national liberation" became central to the Party program, but the ICP
from the outset dominated the league. According to Vo Nguyen Giap, the
Party set political goals for the Viet Minh at the expense of its historic
“anti-feudal task," but necessarily:

"Mo rally the different strata of the people and the national
revolutionary forces in the struggle against the main enemy, that
is the French and Japanese fascist imperialists...

"Tt is precisely for this reason [emphasis on national libera-
tion/ that within a short period, the Viet Minh gathered together
the great forces of the people and became the most powerful politi-
eal organization of the broad revolutionary masses." 16/

By 1943, the Viet Minh was in fact attracting a broad spectrum of national-
ists and intelligentsia, as well as extending its organization steadily
among the peasants. A 1946 official history presented this formulation

of its program at that time: i

"At a conference in 1943, delegates of all anti-fascit revo-
lutionary organizations adopted the following political program:
(1) Election of a constituent assembly to work out the constitu-
tion for a free Indo-China on the basis of adult suffrage; (2)
Restoration of democratic liberties and rights, including freedom
of organization, press and assembly, freedom of belief and opinion,
the right to property, the right of workers to strike, freedom of ¥
domicile and freedom of propaganda; (3) The organization of a
national army; (4) The right of minorities to self-determination;
(5) Equal rights for women; (6) Nationalization of banks belong-
ing to fascists and the formation of an Indo-Chinese national
bank; (7) The building up of a strong national economy by the
development of native industry, communications, agriculture and
commerce; (8) Agricultural reforms and the extension of cultiva-
tion to fallow lands; (9) Labor legislation, including the intro-
duction of the eight-hour working day and progressive reforms in
social legislation; (10) Development of national education and
culture.

"In the international sphere the program stands for the

‘revision of unequal treaties and an alliance with all democratic
nations for the maintenance of peace. More important for the

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-21.
