Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

actually was. If it were as bad as Westmoreland said it was, then large ,
numbers of foreign troops could do little more than hold on to a few
enclaves. If the situation were not significantly worse than the year
before (and Johnson apparently felt in many ways it was not) then the
U.S. was merely bringing in more foreign troops than were needed and
could be expected to have difficulty getting them out again. Finally,
Johnson expected the Vietnamese reaction to the massive input of foreign
troops to be a major problen.

Under Secretary George Ball clearly felt that the U.S. was already
engaged in an indeterminate struggle in Vietnam. Raising the US/FWMAF
force levels to 44 battalions would, he expected, accomplish nothing more
than raise the cost to the U.S. when it finally lost the war and pulled
out.

Assistant Secretary Bundy saw in the 44 battalion request some
ultimatum aspects that he felt were undesirable. Apparently, although
he did not say so, he expected approval of that request and announcement
of it to trigger some kind of dire response from the other side.

The person among the principals whose views can be found in the
files dared to attach a probability to his expectations. Assistant
Secretary McNaughton gave Secretary McNamara on the 13th of July a memo-
randum entitled "Analysis and Options for South Vietnam." McNaughton
described three possible courses the war could take:

(1) Success for the US/GVN. (Actions one should expect to see
in such a case were the extension of GVN control throughout the country,
_ the disarming of the VC armed units, the cessation of infiltration and
other DRV support, and the relegation of the terror and other insurgent
activity to little more than a rural police problem.)

(2) Inconclusive for either side (self-explanatory).
(3) GVN collapse and concomitant U.S. defeat (self-explanatory) .

McNaughton recommended to Secretary McNamara that the U.S. deploy the 44
battalions and be prepared to send more force to try for a win as defined
above. McNaughton's expectations for such a course, as expressed in
probabilities, are laid out below. The assumed U.S.’force level to

develop these probabilities was between 200,000 and 400,000 men. With that
emount of force, the probability of Success/Inconclusive/Collapse was

for the year 1966: ..2/.7/.1

for the year 1967: .4/.45/.15 and

for the year 1968: 5/.3/.2 -- no further projection being made.

It is noteworthy that while McNaughton expected the probability of success
to increase with each year of investment, he also expected the probability

120 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
