Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

especially as the Washington-Paris exchanges were making headlines
despite efforts to keep them under wraps. It was only because of
the stories and British annoyance that Dulles directed that the
British, Australian, and New Zealand ambassadors be informed "in
general terms" regarding U.S.-French talks. vu

2. Agreement with France Appears Increasingly Unlikely

a. U.S. Begins Contingency Planning

Although the setting up of several U.S. preconditions to
involvement and the qualifications of the French reply by no means
made intervention an immediate possibility, the U.S., apparently
for the first time, moved ahead on contingency planning. The State
Department's Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs took the lead by producing
a hypothetical timetable based on the assumption of U.S.-French
agreement in principle to the proposed conditions by 21 May. 8/

FEA also outlined a full slate of urgent priority studies to be under-
taken by various Government agencies, including U.S. strategy under
differing circumstances of Chinese involvement in the war. 9/ By 24 May;
FEA had forwarded a contingency study of the Operations Planning Board.
which proposed, among other things, U.S. public and private communica-
tions to Peking to prevent, or at least reduce the effectiveness of,
direct Chinese intervention. 10/

b. Three Regional Pacts Considered.

The initiation of planning for U.S. intervention extended
to more far-ranging discussions of the purposes, requirements, and.
make-up of a Southeast Asia collective defense organization. The frame-
work of the discussions evidenced the Government's intention thet united
action only be undertaken after the Geneva conference had reached a
stalemate or, far less likely, a settlement. Three regional formulations
were envisaged: the first would be designed for direct action, probably
without British participation, either to defeat the Viet Minh or exclude
them from gaining control of Indochina; the second, formed after a
settlement, would. comprise the present SEATO members and functions, in
particular actual assistance to the participating Asian states against
external attack or “Communist insurrection"; the third would have a
broad Asian membership, with its function limited to social and economic
cooperation. 11/

¢. JCS Point Out Key Planning Considerations

An important input to contingency planning on intervention
came from the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On 20 May, the JCS sent a
memorandum to the Secretary of Defense entitled "U.S. Military Partici-
pation in Indochina." 12/ In the paper, the Chiefs requested formu-
lation of a Defense Department position on the size of any U.S.
contributions and the nature of the command structure once united
action began. They noted the "limited availability of U.S. forces

A-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
