Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV.B Evolution of the War (26 Vols.) 
Counterinsurgency: The Kennedy Commitments, 1961-
1963 (5 Vols.) 
5. The Overthrow ofNgo Dinh Diem, May-Nov, 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV. B. E. 
EVOLlJTIOE OF THS HAP. 
The OverthrmT of Ngo Dinh Diem 
TOP SECRET ., Sensitive 
-----------
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
SUMlf~RY AND ANALYSI§ 
The Diem coup was one of those critical events in the history of U.S. 
policy that could have altered our commitment. 
The choices were there: 
(1 ) continue to plod along in a limited fashion with Diem -- despite his 
and l'J11U!s growing unpopularity; (2) encourage or tacitly support the over-
throw of Diem, taking the risk that the GVN might cruEble and/or accommodate 
to the VC; and (3) grasp the opportunity -- with the obvious risks -- of the 
political instability in South Vietnam to disengage. 
The first option ·was 
rejected because of the belief that we could not win with Diem-Nhu. 
The 
third was nevery seriously considered a policy alternative because of the 
assumption that an independent, non-communist SVN was too important a stra-
tegic interest to abandon - - and because the situation ".;as not sufficiently 
drastic to call into question so basic an assumption . 
The second course 
was chosen mainly for the reasons the first was rejected --Vietnam was 
thought too important ; we "mnted to win; and the rebellious generals 
seemed to offer that prospect. 
In making the choice to do nothing to prevent the coup and to tacitly 
support it , the U.S. inadvertently deepened its involvement . 
The inadvertence 
is the key factor . It was a situation without good alternatives. 
While 
Diem! s government offered some semblance of stability and authority , its 
repressive actj.ons against t he Buddhists had permanently alientated popular 
support, with a high probability of victory for the Viet Congo 
As efficient 
as the military coup leaders appeared, they were without a manageable base 
of political support . 
When they came to power and >-Then the lid was taken 
off the Diem-Nhu reporting system, the GVN position was revealed as weak 
and deteriorating . 
And , by virtue of its interference in internal Vietnamese 
affairs , the U. S. had assQmed a significant responsibility for the new regime, 
a responsibility which heightened our commitment and deepened our involvement. 
The catalytic event that precipitated the protracted crisis which 
ended in the downfall of the Diem regime was a badly handl ed Buddhist religious 
protest in Hue on May 8, 1963 . In and of i tself the incident was hardly 
something to shake the foundations of power of most modern rulers , but the 
manner in which Diem responeded to it , and the subsequent protests which i t 
generated, was precisely the one most likel y to aggravate not alleviate the 
situation . 
At stake , of course, was far more than a r eligious issue . 
The 
Buddhist protest had a profoundly pol itical character from the beginning . 
I t sprang and fed upon the feelings of political frustration and repression 
Diem!s autocratic rule had engendered . 
The beginning of the end for Diem can, then, be traced through events 
to the regime !s violent suppression of a Buddhist protest demonstration in 
i 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Hue on Buddha's birthday, May 8, in 1'Thich nine people were killed and 
another fourteen injured. 
Although Buddhists had theretofore been wholly 
quiescent politically, in subsequent vleeks, a full-blown Buddhist "struggle" 
movement demonstrated a sophisticated command of public protest techniques 
by a cohesive and disciplined organization, somewhat belying the notion tha,t 
the movement was an outraged,spontaneous response to religious repression 
and discrimination. 
Nonetheless, by June it was clear that the regime was 
confronted not with a dissident religious minority, but with a grave crisis 
of public confidence. 
The Buddhist protest had become a vehicle for mobiliz-
ing the widespread popular resentment of an arbitrary -and often oppressive 
rule. It had become the focal point of political opposition to Diem. 
Under 
strong U. S. pressure and in the face of an outraged world opinion, the r egime 
reached ostensible agreement with the Buddhists on June 16. 
But the agree-
ment merely papered over the crisis, without any serious concessions by 
Diem. 
This intransigence was reinforced by Diem ' s brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, 
and his I'life , who bitterly attacked the Buddhists throughout the summer . 
By mid-August the crisis was reaching a breaking point. 
The Buddhists' demonstrations and protest created a crlS1S for American 
policy as well . 
The U.S. policy of support for South Vietnam's struggle 
against the Hanoi-supported Viet Cong insurgency was founded on unequivocal 
support of Diem, whom the U.S. had long regarded as the only national leader 
capable of unifying his people for their internal war . 
When the Buddhist 
protest revealed widespread public disaffection, the U.S . made repeated 
attempts to persuade Diem to redress the Buddhist grievances, to r epair 
his public image, and to win back public support . 
But the Ngos were un-
willing to bend. 
Diem, in true mandarin style, was preoccupied with ques-
tions of face and survival - - not popular support . 
He did not understand 
the profound changes his country had experienced under stress, nor did he 
understand the requirement for popular support that the new sense of national-
ism had created. 
The U.S. Ambassador, Frederick Nolting, had conducted a 
low-key diplomacy toward Diem, designed to bring him to the American way 
of thinking through reason and persuasion. 
He approached the regime during 
the first weeks of the Buddhist crisis in the sa~e manner, but got no re-
sults . 
lVhen he left on vacation at the end of May, his DCM, William Truehart, 
abandoned the soft sell for a tough line. 
He took U.S . views to Diem not 
as expressions of opinion, but as demands for action . 
Diem, however, re-
mained as obdurate and evasive as ever. 
Not even the U. S. threat to dissoci-
ate itself from GVN actions in the Buddhist crisis brought movement . 
In late June, with Nolting still on leave , President Kennedy announced 
the appointment of Henry Cabot Lodge as Ambassador to Vietnam to replace 
Nolting in September. 
In the policy deliberations then taking place in 
Washington, consideration was being given for the first time to "That effect 
a coup against Diem would have. 
But Nolting returned, first to Washington 
and then to Saigon, to argue that the only alternative to Diem was chaos . 
The U.S . military too, convinced that the war effort was going well, felt 
.that nothing should be done to upset the apple cart. 
So Nolting was given 
another chance to talk Diem into conciliating the Buddhists . 
lne Ambassador 
worked assiduously at the task through July and the first part of August , 
but Diem would agree only to gestures and half-measures that could not 
ii 
TOP SECRET -
2nsitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET .- Sensitive 
stop the grave deterior8,tion of the political situation . 
Nolting left 
Vietnam permanently in mid-August with vague as surances from Diem that 
he would seek to improve the climate of relations with the Buddhists. 
Less than a week later, Nolting "Tas betrayed by Nhu ' s dramatic August 21 
midnight raids on Buddhist pagodas throughout Vietnam 
One of the important lessons of the American involvement in South 
Vietnam in support of Diem was that a policy of unreserved commitment to 
a particular leadership placed us in a weak and manipulable position on 
important internal issues. 
The view that there vTere "no alternatives" 
to Diem greatly limited the extent of our influence over the regime and 
ruled out over the years a number of kinds of l everage that we might use-
fully have employed or threatened to emply . 
Furthermore, it placed the 
U.S. in the unfortunate role of suitor to a fickle lover . 
Aware of our 
fundamental commitment to him, Diem could with relative impunity ignore 
our vrishes. 
It reversed the real power r elationship between the hlO coun-
tries. 
Coupled with Diem ' s persistent and ruthless elimination of all po-
tential political opposition, it left us with rather stark alternatives 
indeed ,vhen a crisis on which we could not allow delay and equivocation 
finally occurred. 
For bett er or worse, the August 21 pagoda raids decided 
the issue for us. 
The raids, themselves , were carefully timed by Nhu to be carried out 
when the U.S. vTaS without an Ambassador, and only after a decree p,;Lacing 
. 
the country under military martial law had been issued. 
They were conducted 
by combat police and special forces units taking orders directly from Nhu, 
not through the Army chain of command . 
The sweeping attacks resulted in 
the wounding of about 30 monks, the arrest of over 1,400 Buddhists and 
the closing of the pagodas (after they had been damaged and looted in the 
raids). 
In their brutality and their blunt repudiation of Diem' s solemn 
word to Nolting, they were a direct, impudent slap in the face for the U. S. 
Nhu expected that in crushing the Buddhists he could confront the new U. S. 
Ambassador with a fait accompli in which the U. S. would complaininglyac-
quiesce , as we had in so many of the regime's actions which we opposed . 
Moreover, he attempted to fix blame for the raids on the senior Army gener-
als . 
Getting word of the attacks in Honolulu, where he was conferring 
with Nolting and Hilsman, Lodge flew directly to Saigon . 
He immediately 
let it be known that the U. S. completely dissociated itself from the raids 
and could not tolerate such behavior . 
In Washington the morning after, 
while much confusion reigned about who was responsible for the raids, a 
statement repudiating them was promptly released . Only after several 
days did the U. S. finally establish Nhu ' s culpabili 
in t he attacks and 
publicly exonerate the Army . 
On August 23, the first contact vTith a U. S. representative ,vas made 
by generals who had begun to plan a coup against Diem. 
The generals wanted 
a clear indication of where the U. S. stood . 
State in i ts subsequently con-
troversial reply, drafted and cleared on a weekend when several of the 
principal Presidential advisors were absent from Washington, affirmed that 
Nhu I s continuation in a pOvTer position ,vi thin the regime "las intolerable 
iii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and, if after Diem had been given an opportunity to rid hlifiself of Nhu 
and did not, "then, we must face the possibility that Diem himself canJlot 
be preserved." 
This message was to be communicated to the generals , and 
Diem was to be warned that Nhu must go . 
Lodge agreed ,vi th the approach 
to the generals, but felt it was futile to present Diem with an ultimatum 
he would only ignore and one that might tip off the palace to the coup 
plans . 
Lodge proceeded to inform only the generals . 
They were told that 
the U.S. could no longer support a regime which included Nhu, but that 
keeping Diem "ioTaS entirely up to them . 
This vTaS cormnunicated to the gener-
als on August 27. 
The President and some of his advisors, however, had 
begun to have second thoughts about svr:l tching horses so suddenly, and with 
so little information on whether the coup could succeed, and if it did, 
what kind of government it would bring to power . 
As it turned out, Washir~­
ton's anxiety was for naught, the plot "ioTaS premB,ture, B,nd after several 
uncertain days, its demise was finally recognized on August 31. 
Thus by the end of August, we found ourselves without a leadership 
to support and without a policy to follo,v in our relations with the GVN. 
In this context a month-long policy review took place in Washington and in 
Vietnam. 
It was fundamentally a search for alternatives . 
In both places. 
the issue was joined between those who saw no realistic alternatives to 
Diem and felt that his policies were having only a marginal effect on the 
war effort, which they wanted to get on with by renewing our support and 
communication with Diem; and those who felt that the war against the VC 
would not possibly be won with Diem in power and preferred therefore to 
push for a coup of some kind. 
The first view was primarily supported by 
the military and the CIA both in Saigon and in Washington, while the latter 
was helf by the U. S. Mission, the State Department and members of the 
White House staff . 
In the end, a third alternative "lvas selected, namely 
to use pressure on Diem to get him to remove Nhu from the scene and to 
end hi s repressive policies . 
Through September, however , the debate con-
tinued with growing intensity . 
Tactical considerations, such as another 
Lodge approach to Diem about removing the Nhus and the effect of Senat9r 
Church ' s resolution calling for an aid suspension, focused the discussion 
at times, but the issue of whether to renew our support for Diem remained . 
The decision hinged on the assessment of how seriously the political deteri-
ora tion "ioTaS affecting the war effort. 
In the course of these policy debates, several participants pursued 
the logical but painful conclusion that if the war could not be won with 
Diem, and if his removal would lead to political chaos and also j eopardize 
the war effort, then the "IoTar was probably unwinnable. If that were the 
case, the argument vlent, then the U. S. should really be facing a more basic 
decision on either an orderly disengagement from an irretrievable situa-
tion, or a major escalation of the U. S. involvement, including the use of 
U. S. combat troops. 
These prophetic minority voices were, hO"lorever , rais -
i ng an unpleasant prospect that the Administration was unprepared to face 
at that time . 
In hindsight, however, it is clear that this was one of 
the times in the history of our Vietnam involvement when "lve \"Tere making 
fundamental choices . 
The option to disengage honorably at that time now 
appears an attractively low-cost one. 
But for the Kennedy Administration 
iv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sellsitive 
then, the costs no doubt appeared much higher. 
In any event, it proved to 
be um-Tilling to accept the implications of predictions for a bleak future. 
The Administration hewed to the belief that if the U,S, be but willing to 
exercise its power, it could ultimately always have its vlay in world affairs. 
Nonetheless, in view of the widely divergent views of the principals 
in Saigon, the Administration sought independent judgments with t"TO successive 
fact-finding missions . 
The first of these whirlwind inspections , by General 
Victor Krulak, JCS SACSA, and a State Department Vietnam expert, Joseph 
Mendenhall, from September 7-10, resulted in diametrically opposing reports 
to the President on the conditions and situation and "ivas, as a result, futile. 
The Krulak-Mendenhall divergence was significant because it typifies the 
deficient analysj_s of both the U,S, civilian and military missions in Viet-
nam with respect to the overall politics,l situation in the country. 
The 
U, S. civilian observers, for their part, failed to fully appreciate the im-
pact Diem had had in preventing the emergence of any other political forces . 
The Buddhists, while a cohesive and effective minority protest movement, 
lacked a program or the means to achieve power . 
The labor unions were 
entirely urban-based and appealed to only a small segment of the population. 
The clandestine political parties were small, urban, and usually elitist . 
The religious sects had a narrow appeal and were based on ethnic minorities . 
Only the Viet Cong had any real support and influence on a broad base in 
t he countryside . 
The only real alternative source of political power was 
the Army since it had a large, disciplined organization spanning the country, 
. wi th an independent communica tj_ons and transportation system and a strong 
superiori ty to any other group in coercive pOl'ler . 
In its reports on the 
Army, however, General Harkins and the U.S . military had failed to appre-
ciate the deeply corrosive effect on internal allegiance and discipline 
in the Army that Diem's loyalty based promotion and assignment policies 
had had . 
They did not foresee that in the 'Yrake of a coup senior officers 
would lack the cohesiveness to hang together and that the temptations of 
power would promote a devisive internal competition among ambitious men 
at the expense of the "i'lar against the Viet Cong . 
Two weeks after the fruitless Krulak-Mendenhall mission, with the 
Washington discussions still stalemated, it was the turn of Secretary 
McNamara and General Taylor, the Chairman of the JCS, to assess the problem. 
They left for Vietnam on September 23 with the Presidential instruction 
t o appraise the condition of the war effort and the impact on it of the 
Buddhist political tUrmoil and to recommend a course of action for the 
GVN and the U,S . 
They r eturned to Washington on October 2 . 
Their report 
was a somewhat contradictory compromise between the views of the civilian 
and military staffs . It affirmed that the war was being won, and that it 
would be successfully concluded in the first three corps areas by the end 
of 1964, and in the Delta by 1965, thereby permitting the withdrawal of 
American advisors, although it noted that the political tensions were start-
ing to have an adverse effect on it , 
But , more importantly, it r ecommended 
a series of measures to coerce Diem into compliance vrith American wishes 
t hat included a selective suspension of U, S. economic aid, an end to aid 
for the special forces units used in the August 21 raids unless they were 
subordinated to the Joint General Staff, and the continuation of Lodge ' s 
cool official aloofness from the regime . It recommended the public 
v 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensi tj.ve 
announcement of the U,S, intention to vlithdraw 1,000 troops by the end 
of the year, but suggested that the aid suspensions not be a,nnounced in order 
to give Diem a chance to respond without a public loss of face . It con-
cluded by re commending aga,ins t active U, S, encouragement of a coup, in 
spite of the fact that an aid suspension was the one step the generals had 
asked for in August as a sign of U,S, condemnation of Diem and support for 
a change of government. 
The report ivaS quick.ly adopted by Kennedy in the 
NSC and a brief, and subsequently much rued, statement was r eleased to the 
press on October 2, announcing the planned withdra\val of 1,000 troops by 
year's end . 
The McNamara-Taylor mission, like the Krulak-Mendenhall mission before 
it and the Honolulu Conference in November after the coup, points up the 
great difficulty encountered by high l evel fact-finding missions and con-
ferences in getting at the "facts" of a complex policy problem like Viet-
nam in a short time . It is hard to believe that hasty visits by harried 
high level officials with overloaded itineraries really add much in the 
way of additional data or lucid insight . 
And because they become a focal 
point of worldwide press coverage, they often raise public expectations or 
anxieties that may only create additional problems for the President . 
There 
were many such high level conferences over Vietnam . 
Of the recommendations of the McNamara-Taylor mission, the proposal for 
a selective suspension of economic aid, in particular the suspension of 
the commercial import program, was the most significant both in terms of 
its effect , and as an example of the adroit use or denial of American assis-
tance.to achieve our foreign policy objectives , 
In .this instance economic 
sanctions, in the form of selected aid suspensions in those programs to which 
the regime would be most sensitive but that would have no immediate adverse 
effect on the war effort , were used constructively to influence events rather 
than negatively to punish those who had violated our wishes , our usual re-
action to coups in Latin America', 
The proposal itself had been under con-
sideration since the abortive coup plot of August . 
At that time, Lodge 
had been authorized to suspend aid if he thought it would enhance the like-
lihood of the SUccess of a coup . 
Later in September he was again given 
specific control over the delay or suspension of any of the pending aid 
programs . 
On both occasions, however, he had expressed doubt about the 
utility of such a step . 
In fact, renewal of the commercial import program 
had been pending since early in September, so that the adoption of the 
McNamara- Taylor proposal merely formalized the existing situation into 
policy. 
As might have been expected (although the record l eavffiambiguous 
whether this was a conscious aim of the Administration ) , the Vietnamese 
general s interpreted the suspension as a green light to proceed vli th a 
coup . 
While this policy was being applied in October , Lodge shunned all 
contact with the regime that did not come at Diem ' s initia,ti ve . 
He wanted 
it clearly understood that they must come to him prepared to adopt our 
advice before he would recommend to Washington a change in U, S, policy . 
Lodge performed with great skill, but inevitably frictions developed l'Tithin 
vi 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the Mission as different viewpoints and proposals came forward . 
In particular, 
. Lodge's disagreements and disputes with General Harkins during October vThen 
the coup plot was maturing and later were to be of considerable embarrass-
ment to Washington when they leaked to the press. 
Lodge had carefully 
cultivated the press, and 1-Then the storj.es of friction appeared, it was 
invariably Harkins or Richardson or someone el se who was the villain. 
No sooner had the McNamara-Taylor mission returned to Washington and 
reported its recommendations than the generals r eopened contact with the 
Mission indicating that once again they were preparing to strike against 
the regime. 
Washington's immediate reaction on October 5 was to reiterate 
the decision of the NSC on the McNamara-Taylor report, i.e . , no U.S. encour-
agement of a coup. 
Lodge was instructed, however, to maintain contact with 
the generals and to monitor their plans as they emerged . 
These periodic 
contacts continued and by October 25, Lodge had come to believe that Diem 
was unlj.kely to respond to our pressure and that we should therefore not 
thwart the coup forces. 
Harkins disagreed, believing that we still had not 
given Diem a real chance to rid himself of Nhu and that we should present 
him with such an ultimatum and test his r esponse before going ahead with 
a coup. 
He, furthermore , had reservations about the strength of the coup 
forces when compared with those likely to remain loyal to the regime . All 
this left Washington anxious and doubtful. 
Lodge was cautioned to seek 
fuller information on the coup plot, including a line-up of forces and the 
proposed plan of action . 
The U. S. could not base its policy on support for 
a coup attempt that did not offer a strong prospect of success . 
Lodge was 
counseled to consider ways of delaying or preventing the coup i f he doubted 
its prospects for success. 
By this juncture, however, r,odge felt committed 
and, furthermore, felt the matter was no longer in our hands . 
The generals 
were taking the action on their own initiative and we could only prevent 
it now by denouncing them to Diem . 
While this debate was still going on, 
the generals struck. 
Shortly after Ambassador Lodge and Admiral Felt had called on Diem on 
November 1, the generals made their move, culminating a summer and fall of 
complex intrigue . 
The coup was led by General Minh, the most respected of 
the senior generals, together with Generals Don, Kim and Khiem. 
They convoked 
a meeting of all but a few senior officers at JGS headquarters at noon on 
the day of the coup, announced their plans and got the support of their com-
patriots. 
The coup itself '-Tas executed with skill and swiftness . 
They 
had devoted special attention to ensuring that the major potentially loyal 
forces were isolated and their leademneutralized at the outset of the opera-
tion . 
By the late afternoon of November 1, only the palace guard remained 
to defend the two brothers. 
At 4:30 p .m., Diem called Lodge to ask where 
the U. S. stood . 
Lodge was noncommital and confined himself to concern for 
Diem ' s physical safety . 
The conversation ended inconclusively. 
The gener-
als made repeated calls to the palace offering the brothers safe conduct 
out of the country if they surrendered, but the tv-TO held out hope until the 
very end . 
Sometime that evening they secretly slipped out of the palace 
through an underground escape passage and went to a hide -away in Cholon . 
There they were captured the following morning after their whereabouts was 
learned when the palace fell . 
Shortly the tvlO brothers were murdered in the 
back of an armored personnel carrier en route to JGS headquarters. 
vii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Having successfully carried off their coup, the generals began to 
make arrangements for a civilian goverrunent. 
Vice President Tho 'Ivas named 
to hea,d a largely civilian cabinet, but General Minh became President and 
Chairman of the shado'H Military Revolutionary Council . After having delayed 
an appropriate period, the U,S. recognized the ne'H goverDJnent on November 8. 
As the euphoria of ,the first days of liber ation from the heavy hand of the 
Diem r egime 'Hore off, hO'Hever, the r eal gravity of the economic situation 
and the lack of expertj,se in the ne'H government beca..me apparent to both 
Vietnamese and American officials. 
The deterioration of the military situa-
tion and the strategic hamlet program also came more and more clearly into 
perspective . 
These topics domina,ted the discussions at the Honolulu Conference on 
November 20 'Hhen Lodge and the country team met 'Hith Rusk, McNamara, Taylor, 
Bell, and Bundy. 
But the meeting ended inconclusively. After Lodge had 
conferred with the President a fe'H days later in Washington, the ,White House 
tried to pull together some conclusions and offer some guidance for our con-
tinuing and no'H deeper involvement in Vietnam. 
The instructions contained 
in NSAM 273, hOi-rever, did not reflect the truly dire situation as it 'Has to 
come to light in succeeding weeks. 
The reappraisals forced by the ne'H 
information would s'Hiftly make it irrelevant as it 'Has "overtaken by events.
1I 
For the military coup d ' etat against Ngo Dinh Diem, the U. S. must 
accept its full share of responsibility . 
Beginning in August of 1963 'He 
variously authorized, sanctioned and encouraged the coup efforts of the 
Vietnamese generals and offered full support for a successor goverDJnent . 
In October 'He cut off aid to Diem in a direct rebuff, giving a green light 
to the generals . 
We maintained clandestine contact 'Hith them throughout 
the plaD~ing and execution of the coup and sought to revie'H their operational 
plans and proposed ne'H government. 
Thus, as the nine-year rule of Diem 
came to a bloody end, our complicity in his overthro'H heightened our r e ~ 
sponsibilities and our commitment in an essentially leaderless Vietnam . 
viii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
("') 
:I: 
:::a 
o 
2 o 5 
C> 
-< 
DATE 
S May 1963 
10 May 1963 
lS May 1963 
( 
30 May 1963 
4 Jun 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
CHRONOLOOY 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Hue incident 
Manifesto of Buddhist 
clergy 
Nolting meeting with 
Diem; Embassy Saigon 
message 103S · 
Buddhist demonstration 
Truehart meeting with 
Thuan 
Tho committee 
appointed 
ix 
DESCRIPTION 
Government troops fire on a Buddhist pro·· 
test demonstration, killing nine and 
wounding fourteen . 
The incident triggers· 
a nationwide Buddhist protest and a 
crisis of popular confidence for the 
Diem regime. 
GVN maintains the inci-
dent was an act of VC terrorism. 
A five point demand by the Buddhist 
clergy is transmitted to the Govern-
ment. 
It calls for freedom to fly 
the Buddhist flag, legal equality 
with the Catholic Church, an end 
of arrests, punisbment of the perpe-
trators of the May S incident, and 
indemnification of its victims. 
U.S. Ambassador Nolting meets with 
Diem and outlines the steps the U.S. 
wants Diem to take to redress the 
Buddhist grievances and recapture 
public confidence. 
These include 
an admission of responsibility for 
the Hue incident, compensation of the 
victims, and a reaffirmation of re-
ligious equality and non-discrimina-
tion. 
350 Buddhist monks demonstrate in 
front of the National Assembly and 
announce a 4S-hour hunger strike. 
With Nolting on leave, charge d'affaires 
Truehart meets with Secretary of State 
Thuan,and on instruction from the 
State Department, warns that U.S. 
support for the GVN could not be 
maintained if there were another bloody 
suppression of Buddhists. 
Later that day the Government announces 
the appointment of an inter-ministerial 
committee headed by Vice President Tho 
to resolve the r eligious issue. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
5 Jun 1963 
8 Jun 1963 
11 Jun 1963 
12 Jun 1963 
14 Jun 1963 
16 Jun 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sens:i.tive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Tho committee meets 
Buddhists 
Madame Nhu attacks 
. Buddhists 
First Buddhist suicide 
by fire 
Truehart repeats U.S. 
dissociation threat 
Tho committee meets 
again with Buddhists 
GVN-Buddhist communique 
x 
DESCRIPTION 
The first meeting between the Tho 
committee and the Buddhist leader-
ship takes place, after which 
each side publicly quest ions the 
other's good faith in the negotia-
tions. 
Madame ~fuu, wife of Diem' s powerful 
brother, publicly accuses the Buddhists 
of being infiltrated with communist 
agents . 
Later on the same day, Truehart 
protests Mme Nhu ' s remakrs. to Diem 
and threatens to dissociate the U. S. 
from any future repressive measures 
against the Buddhists . 
At noon in the middle of a dmmtown 
intersection, a Buddhist monk, Thich 
Quang Duc, is immersed in gasoline 
and sets himself afire. 
His fiery 
protest suicide is photographed and 
is front page material in the world ' s 
newspapers . 
Shock and indignation 
are universal. 
Mme Nhu subsequently 
refers to it as a "barbecue ." 
Truehart sees Diem again to protest 
his lack of action on the Buddhist 
problem and says that Quang Due ' s 
suicide has shocked the world. If 
Diem does not act , the U. S. will be 
forced to dissociate itself from 
him. 
Under U.S. pressure, negotiations 
between Vice President Tho ' s committee 
and the Buddhist leadership reopen 
in apparent earnest . 
A joint GVN-Buddhist communique is 
released as a product of the nego-
tiations that outlines the elements 
of a settlement, but affixes no re-
sponsibility for the May 8 Hue inci-
dent. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
Late June-
July 
27 Jun 1963 
3 Jul 1963 
4 Jul 1963 
5 Jul 1963 
10 Jul 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Buddhist protest 
intensifies 
Kennedy announces 
Lodge appointment 
Tho committee 
absolves regime 
White House meeting 
on Vietnamese si tua-
tion 
Nolting in Washington 
SNIE 53-2-63 
xi 
DESCRIPTION 
Buddhists protest activities intensi~y 
as l eadership passes from the dis-
credited moderate , older leademto 
younger militants . 
The Saigon press 
corps is actively cultivated . 
President Kennedy, visiting in Ireland, 
announces the appointment of Henry 
Cabot I,odge as the new U. S. Ambassador 
to South Vietnam, effective in Septem-
ber. 
Vice President Tho ' s committee announces 
that a preliminary investigation of 
the May 8 i ncident has confirmed that 
the deaths were the result of an act 
of VC terrorism . 
At a State Department briefing for the 
President it is generally agreed that 
Diem will not voluntarily remove Nhu . 
A dis cussion of the likely consequences 
of a coup r eveal s divergent views. 
Having cut short his vacation to re-
turn to Washington for consultations , 
Nolting confers with Under Secretary 
of State George Ball and voices the 
fear that an attempt to overthro\v Diem 
would r esult in a protract ed religious 
ci vil '\'rar that would open the door to 
the Viet Cong o We should not abandon 
Diem yet. 
While in Hashington he also 
sees Secretary McNamara . 
This special intelligence estimate notes 
coup rumors in Vietnam and warns that 
a coup would disrupt the war effort 
and perhaps give the Viet Cong the 
opportunity for gains they had been 
hoping for. 
It concludes , however , 
that if Diem does nothi ng to implement 
the June 16 agreement s , Buddhist un-
rest will continue through the summer 
and increase the likelihood of a coup 
attempt. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
11 Jul 1963 
15 Jul 1963 
19 Jul 1963 
5 Aug 1963 
14 Aug 1963 
15 Aug 1963 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCU1I1EN'T 
Nolting ' s return 
to Saigon 
Nhu squelches coup 
plotting 
Embassy Saigon 
message 85 
Diem speaks on radio 
McNamara press 
conference 
Second Buddhist 
suicide 
Nolting-Diem meeting 
New' York Herald Tribune 
article by Marguerite 
Higgins 
xii 
DESCRIPTION 
Nolting returns to Vietnam with 
Washington ' s blessing to make one l ast 
attempt to persuade Diem to conciliate 
the Buddhists . 
The hope is to dra\-l 
on the good will that Nolting has 
built up i n his two years of service . 
At a special meeting for all senior 
generals, Nhu attacks their loyalty 
to the r egime for not having thwarted 
the numerous coup plots that had been 
repor t ed. 
The meeting apparently 
forestalls any immediate threat to 
the family . 
Deeply resentful of Truehart ' s t ough 
pressure tactics, Nolting meets with 
Diem and attempts to mollify him . , 
He convinces Diem to make a nation-
wide radio address with concessions 
to t he Buddhists . 
Complying with the letter but not the 
spirit of Nolting ' s r equest , Diem 
delivers a brief cold ratio address 
that makes only very minor concessions 
t o the Buddhists and asks for harmony , 
and support of the Government. 
At a press conference , Secretary 
McNamara says the war i s progressing 
well and the Buddhist crisis has not 
yet affected it . 
A second Buddhist monk commi ts suicide 
by burning himsel f to death in the 
continuing protest against the Diem 
regime . 
In their final meeting before Nolting ' s 
departure from Vietnam, Diem promises 
to make a public statement r epudiating 
Mme Nhu ' s inflammatory denunciations of 
the Buddhists. 
Nolting l eft the next 
day. 
Diem' s promised public statement takes 
the form of an interview with Marguerite 
Higgins , conservative correspondent 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
18 Aug 1963 
20 Aug 1963 
21 Aug 1963 
22 Aug 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE~r - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCill1ENT 
Generals decide on 
martial law 
Generals propose 
martial l aw to Nhu 
and Diem 
Nhu ' s forces attack 
pagodas 
Lodge confers with 
Nolting and Hil sman 
Washington reaction 
Lodge arrives in 
Saigon 
xiii 
DESCRIPTION 
of the New York Herald Tribune . 
Diem 
asserts that conciliation has been 
his policy toward the Buddhists all 
along and the family is pleased vIi th 
Lodge's appointment. 
Ten senior Army generals meet and de -
cide that in view of the deteriorating 
political situation, they "Till ask 
Diem for a declar8.tion of martial law 
to permit them to return monks from 
outside Saigon to their OIVD provinces 
and pagodas and thus reduce tensions 
in the capital. 
A small group of generals meets first 
with Nhu and then with Dj_em to propose 
that martial law be decreed forthwith . 
Diem approves the proposal and the 
decree takes effect at midnight . 
Under the cover of the military martial 
law, shortly after midnight, forces 
l oyal to Nhu and under his orders 
attack pagodas throughout Vietnam, 
arresting monks and sacking the sacred 
buildings . 
Over 30 Buddhists are in-
jured and over 1400 arrested . 
The 
attack is a shattering repudiation of 
Diem' s promises to Nolting. 
The Embassy 
i s taken by surprise. 
First ne"rs of the attacks r eaches Lodge 
in Honolulu where he is conferring 
with Nolting and Assistant Secretary 
of State Hilsman . 
He is dispatched 
immediately to Vietnam. 
At 9:30 a.m . a stiff statement is re-
leased by State deploring the raids 
as a direct violation of Diem ' s assur-
ances to the U.S. 
But first intelli-
gence places the blame for them on the 
Army, not Nhu . 
After a brief stop in Tokyo, Lodge 
arrives in Saigon at 9:30 p.m. 
The 
situation still remains confused . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
23 Aug 1963 
24 Aug 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
CIA Informa.tion Report 
TDCS DB-3/656, 252 
Student demonstrations 
Embassy Saigon 
message 316, 
Lodge to Hilsman 
State message 243, 
State to Lodge 
xiv 
DESCRIPrION 
General Don, armed forces commander 
under the martial lavr decree, has 
contacted a CAS officer and asked why 
the U.S. was broadcasting the erroneous 
story that the Army had conducted the 
pagoda raids . 
Nhu's special forces 
were responsible . 
The U. S. should make. 
its position known . 
A separate con-
tact by another general i·ri th a member 
of the mission had brought another 
inquiry as to the U. S. position. 
The query is clear . 
Would we support 
the Army if it a.cted against Nhu and/or 
Diem? 
Large student protest demonstrations 
on behalf of the imprisoned Buddhists 
take place at the faculties of medicine 
and pharmacy at the University of 
Saigon. 
They are a dramatic break with 
the tradition of student apathy to 
politics in Vietnam. 
The regime re -
acts with massive arrests . 
Lodge lays the blame for the raids at 
Nhu ' s feet and states that his influ-
ence is significantly increased . 
But, 
in view of the loyalty of Saigon area 
commanders , a coup attempt would be 
a "shot i n the dark ." 
Subsequently known as the "Aug 24 
cable ," this controversial message ac-
knowledges Nhu ' s responsibility for 
the raids and says that U. S. can no 
longer tolerate his continuation in 
power . If Diem is unable or unwilling 
to remove him, the generals are to 
be t old that the U. S. will be prepared 
to discontinue economic and military 
support, accept the obvious implica-
tion and will promise assistance to 
them i n any period of interim break-
down of the GVN. 
Lodge's permission 
i s requested for a VOA broadcast 
exonerating the Army of responsibility 
for the Aug 21 raids . 
TOP SECRE= - Sensitive 
DATE 
25 Aug 1963 
26 Aug 1963 
27 Aug 1963 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1./ fJ5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Embassy Saigon message 
CAS Saigon message 
0292 
VOA broadcast 
Lodge presents 
credentials to Diem 
NSC meeting 
CAS agents meet 
generals 
Embassy Saigon 
message 361.f 
xv 
DESCRIPTION 
Lodge approves the proposed COlITSe 
of action but sees no r eason to approach 
Diem first. 
Diem ,vill not remove the 
Nhus and it would merely tip off the 
palace to the impending military action . 
Lodge , Harkins, and Richardson meet 
and agree on an approach to the generals 
vTith the information in State ' s 243. 
Early on this Monday morning, VOA in 
South Vietnam broadcasts t he press 
stories placing blame for the Aug 21 
raids on Nhu and absolving the Army . 
It also broadcast press speculation 
that the U.S . is contemplating an 
aid suspension. 
Later the same morning, Lodge presents 
his credentials to Diem, after an early 
morning meeting with Harkins and 
Richardson, at which they agree on 
the details of the approach to the gen-
erals. 
The Aug 24 cable of instructions had 
been drafted, cleared and sent on a 
weekend with McNamara, McCone, Rusk 
and the President all out of town. 
The NSC meeting on Monday morning 
reveals that these top advisors have 
r eservations about proceeding hastily 
with a coup when we lack so much basic 
information about its leadership and 
chances . 
Lodge is asked for more 
details. 
CAS agents Conein and Spera meet with 
Generals Khiem and Khanh respectively. 
Khiem tells Cone in that other partici-
pants are Generals Minh, Kim, Thieu 
and Le, and that General Don was aware 
of the plot and approved, but was too 
exposed to participate. 
Lodge gives an optimistic appraisal 
of the balance of forces for a coup 
and expresses confidence in the identi-
fied leaders . 
TOP SECRET - 90 nsitive 
DATE 
28 Aug 1963 
29 Aug 1963 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
t' } 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
NSC meeting 
MACV message 1557 
State message 269, 
President to Lodge; 
and JCS message 3385, 
Taylor to Harkins 
CAS agents meet Minh 
Embassy Saigon message 
375 
MACV message 1566 
NSC meeting 
State message 272 
xvi 
---
'--
DESCRIPTION 
-. 
At the now daily NSC meetings in 
Washington, the State Department 
participants generally favor going 
ahead with the coup, while the Defense 
Department, both civilian and military, 
prefers another try with Diem . 
Harkins goes on record vTi th doubts 
about the line-up of forces for the 
coup and sees no reason for our "rush 
approval." 
Concerned by the differing views of 
Lodge and Harkins, as Hel~ as the 
division of opinion in Washington, 
the President asks the Ambassador 
and MACV for their separate appraisa~s
. 
At this meeting, arranged by Minh, 
he asks for clear evidence that the 
U.S. will not betray them to Nhu . 
He is unwilling to discuss the details 
of his plan . 
When asked what would 
constitute a sign of U.S. support, 
he replies that the U. S. should sus -
pend economic aid to the regime . 
Lodge replies to the Presidential query 
that the U.S . is irrevocably committed 
to the generals . 
He recommends show-
ing the CAS messages to them to establish 
our good faith and if that is insuffi-
cient, he recommends a suspension of 
economic aid as they requested . 
Harkins reply to Taylor suggests that 
one last effort be made 'tri th Diem in 
the form of an ultimatum demanding 
Nhu's removal. 
Such a move he feels 
will strengthen the hand of the generals, 
not imperil them. 
Another inconclusive meeting is held 
with the division of opinion on a 
U.S. course of action still strong. 
The resu~t is to leave policy making 
in Lodge's hands. 
Lodge is authorized to have Harkins 
show the CAS messages to the generals 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
31 Aug 1963 
2 Sep 1963 
6 Sep 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVEl\1T OR DOCUMENT 
MACV message 1583; 
Embassy Saigon message 
391; and CAS Saigon 
message 0499 
NSC meeting; MGen 
Victor C. Krulak, 
Memo for the Record, 
Vietnam Meeting at 
the State Dept . 
Kennedy TV interview 
Lodge meet:> with Nhu 
NSC meeting 
xvii 
DESCRIPTION 
in exchange for a look at their 
detailed plans. 
He is further au-
thorized to suspend U.S. aid at his 
discretion . 
Harkins meets with Khiem who tells 
him that Minh has called off the coup . 
Military ,'Tas unable achieve a favorable 
balance of forces in the Saigon area 
and doubts about whether the U,S. 
had l eaked their plans to Nhu were 
the deciding factors . 
A future attempt 
is not ruled out . 
With the demise of the coup plot con-
firmed, the NSC (witho-L1t the President) 
meets to try to chart a new policy 
for Vietna~ . 
The discussion reveals 
the divergence between the military 
desire to get on with the war and re-
pair relations with Diem, and the 
State Department view that continued 
support for Diem will eventually mean 
a loss of the war as more and more of 
the South Vietnamese are alientated 
from it . 
No decisions are taken. 
The President, in a TV interview with 
CBS Nev.]'s' Walter Cronkite, expresses 
his disappointment with Diem's handling 
of the Buddhist crisis and concern 
that a greater effort i s needed by the 
GVN to win popular support . 
This can 
be done, he feels, "with change in 
policy and perhaps with personnel. . . " 
Avoiding any contact with Diem, Lodge 
nonetheless meets with Nhu who announces 
his intention to quit the Government 
as a sign of the progress of the cam-
paign against the VC. 
Mme Nhu and 
Archbishop Thuc, another of Diem's 
brothers, are to leave the country 
on extended trips shortly. 
The NSC decides to instruct Lodge to 
reopen "tough" negotiations ,vi th Diem 
and to start by clarifying to him the 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
7 Sep 1963 
8 Sep 1963 
9 Sep 1963 
10 Sep 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVEl.\J"'T OR DOCUMENT 
Archbishop Thuc 
leaves Vietnam 
AID Director Bell 
TV intervie,v 
Mme Nhu leaves 
Vietnam 
Kennedy TV intervie"l 
. NSC meeting 
xviii 
DESCRIPTION 
U,S . position . 
Robert Kennedy 
speculates that if the war can be won 
neither with Diem nor in the event 
of a disruptive coup, we should per-
haps be considering a U.S, disengage-
ment . 
Secretary McNamara proposes 
a fact-finding trip by General Krulak, 
and State suggests including Joseph 
Mendenhall, a senior FSO with Vietnam 
experience . 
They leave later the 
same de.y. 
With the intercession of the Vatican 
and the Papal Delegate in Saigon, 
Archbishop Thuc leaves the country for 
Rome on an extended visit . 
In a televised interview, AID Director 
Bell expresses concern that Congress 
might cut aid to South Vietnam if the 
Diem Government does not change its 
repressive policies. 
Mme Nhu departs from Saigon to attend 
the World Parliamentarians Conference 
in Belgrade and then to take an extended 
trip through Europe and possibly the 
U.S . 
Appearing on the inaugural program of 
the NBC Huntley-Brinkley News, the 
President says he does not believe 
an aid cut-off would be helpful in 
achieving American purposes in Vietnam 
at present . 
Krulak and Mendenhall r eturn from 
Vietnam after a whirlwind four day 
trip and make their report to the 
NSC . 
With them are John Mecklin, 
USIS Director in Saigon, and Rufus 
Phillips , USOM ' s Director of Rural 
Programs . 
Krulak ' s report stresses 
that the war is being won and , while 
t here i s some dissatisfaction in the 
military with Diem, no one would risk 
his neck to remove him . 
A continua-
tion of present policies under Diem 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
11 Sep 1963 
12 Sep 1963 
14 Sep 1963 
16 Sep 1963 
17 Sep 1963 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVEl\TT OR DOCUMENT 
Embassy Saigon 
message 478 
White House meeting 
Senator Church ' s 
Resolution 
State message 411 
Martial law ends 
NSC meeting 
xix 
DESCRIPI'ION 
will yield victory . 
Mendenhall presents 
a completely contradictory view of 
the situation. 
A breakdown of civil 
administration "'T8,S possible and a 
religious civil war could not be ex-
cluded if Diem was not r eplaced . 
The 
war certainly could not be won with 
Diem. 
Phillips and Mecklin support 
Mendenhall with varia t:Lons .. Nolting 
agrees with Krulak. 
All the disagree-
ment prompts the President to ask the 
two emissaries, "You two did visit 
the same country, didn ' t you?" 
Lodge reverses himself in suggesting 
a complete study of kinds of economic 
aid suspension that might be used to 
topple the regime. 
White House decides to hold economic 
aid r enewal in abeyance pending a com-
plete examination of hO"'T it might be 
used to pressure Diem. 
With White House approval, Senator 
Church introduces a resolution in the 
Senate condemning the South Vietnamese 
Gover nment for its repressive handling 
of the Buddhist problem and calling for 
an end to U.S. aid unles s the repressions 
are abandoned . 
Lodge is informed that approval of 
the $18.5 million commercial import 
program is deferred until basic policy 
decisions on Vietnam have been made. 
Martial law is ended throughout the 
country . 
Two alternative proposals for dealing 
with Diem ar e considered . 
The first 
would use an escalatory set of pressures 
to get him to do our bidding. 
The 
second would involve acquiescence in 
recent GVN actions, recognition that 
Diem and Nhu are inseparable, and an 
attempt to salvage as much as possible 
from a bad situation. A decision is 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
21 Sep 1963 
23 Sep 1963 
25 Sep 1963 
27 Sep 1963 
29 Sep 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENf 
White House press 
release 
White House instruc-
tions to McNamara-
Taylor 
McNamara-Taylor 
mission departs 
Opening meeting of 
McNamara-Taylor with 
country team 
National Assembly 
elections 
Embassy Saigon messages 
602 and 608 
McNamara, Taylor and 
Lodge see Diem 
xx 
DESCRIPTION 
taken to adopt the first as policy, 
and also to send Secretary McNamara 
and General Taylor on a fact -gathering 
mission. 
The forthcoming McNamara-Taylor mission 
is announced to the press by the White 
House . 
The White House instructions for the 
mission ask the tI.,ro men to (1) appraise 
the status of the military effort ; 
(2) assess the impact on the war effort 
of the Buddhist crisis; (3) recommend 
a course of action for the GVN to 
redress the problem and for the U.S. 
to get them to do it; and (4) examine 
how our aid can further no. 3. 
The McNamara-Taylor party l eaves Hashing-
ton for itsten day trip to Vietnam . 
The disagreement behleen Harkins and 
Lodge about the situation in-country 
and the progress of the war surfaces 
immediately in this first conference. 
McNamara spends several subsequent 
days touring various parts of Vietnam 
to appraise the war first hand and 
talk with U. S. and Vietnamese officers . 
As announced earlier, and at the end 
of a ~ro forma one week campaign, the 
GVN holds nation-wide elections for 
the Nat:i.onal Assembly with predictably 
high turnouts and majorities for Govern-
ment candidates. 
Aware that McNamara and Taylor are 
tasked to recommend uses of the aid 
program to pressure Diem, both Lodge 
and Brent , the USOM Director, go on 
record against them . 
In their protocol call on Diem, and 
after his two-hour monologue, McNamar~ 
is able to pointedly stress that the 
political unrest and Government re-
pressive measures against the Buddhis~s 
TOP SECr-1 - Sensitive 
DATE 
30 Sep 1963 
2 Oct 1963 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
McNamara, Taylor 
and Lodge meet 
Vict President Tho 
SecDef Memo for the 
President: 
Report of 
the McNamara-Taylor 
mission 
White House 
press release 
xxi 
DESCRIPTION 
were undermining the U. S. war effort . 
Diem seems unimpressed, but does ask 
Taylor for his appraisal, as a mili-
tary man, of the progress of the "Tar. 
Tho stresses to the two visitors the 
gravity of the political deterioratio~ 
and the negative effect it I'Tas having 
on war . 
He ~uestions the success of 
the strategic hamlet program. 
Later 
that day, the McNamara-Taylor party 
leaves South Vietnam for Honolulu. 
After a day in Honolulu to prepare 
a report, McNamara and Taylor return 
to Washington and present their find-
ings and recommendations to a morning 
NSC meeting . 
Their long r eport repre-
sents a compromise between the mili-
tary a.nd the ci v J.lian views. 
It con:~irms 
the progress of the war, but warns of 
t he dangers inherent in the current 
political turmoil and recommends pres-
sures against Diem to bring changes . 
Militarily, it calls for greater GVN 
effort, especially in the Delta and 
i n clear and hold operations, and a 
consolidation of the strategic hamlet 
program. It proposes the announcement 
of the plans to withdraw 1,000 American 
t roops by year ' s end . 
To put political 
pressure on Diem to institute the re-
f or ms we we.nt , it r ecommends a selec-
tive aid suspension, an end of support 
for the special forces responsible fer 
the pagoda raids, and a continuation 
. of Lodge I s aloofness from the regime . 
I t recommends against a coup, but 
~ualifies this by suggesting that an 
alternative leadership be identified 
and cultivated. 
The recow~endations 
are promptly approved by the President . 
A statement following the meeting is 
r el eased as recommended by McNamara 
and Taylor that reiterates the U. S. 
commitment to the struggle against 
the VC, annOUl1ces the 1 , 000 man troop 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
5 Oct 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
CAS Saigon 
message .1385 
NSC meeting 
CAP message 63560 
CAS Saigon message 
· 1445 
xxii 
DESCRIPTION 
withdrawal, and dissociates 
the U.S. from Diem's repressive 
policies . It does not, however, 
announce the aid suspensions. 
CAS agent Conein "accidently" 
meets General Don at Tan Son 
Nhut . · Don asks him to come to 
l\Tha Trang that evening . 
Wi th 
Embassy approval Cone in keeps 
the appointment . 
Don states 
that there is an active plot 
among the generals for a coup, 
and that General Minh wants to 
see Cone in on Oct 5 to discuss 
details . 
The key to the plan, 
according to Don, is the conver-
sion of III Corps Commander , 
General Dinh . 
The President approves detailed 
recommendations of the McNama,ra-
Taylor mission for transmission 
to Lodge . 
" ... President today approved 
r ecommendation that no initiative 
should now be taken to give any 
a cti ve covert encouragement to 
a coup. 
There should, however , 
be urgent covert effort . .. to 
identify and build contacts with 
possible alternative leadership 
as and when it appears. " 
With Lodge ' s approval, and 
pr obably before receipt of 
for egoing message , Conein meets 
with General Minh . 
Minh says 
he must knOi<T the U. S. position 
on a coup in the near future . 
The GVN ' s loss of popular sup-
port is endangering the whole 
war effort . 
Three possible plans 
are mentioned , one involving 
assas·sination . 
Cone in is non-
commits,l . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
6 Oct 1963 
7 Oct 1963 
8 Oct 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
CAS Saigon mes sage 
34026 
Richardson recalled 
CAP message 63560 
National Assembly 
convenes 
Mme Nhu arrives in 
U.S. 
UN General Assembly 
vote 
xxiii 
DESCRIPrION 
Lodge reco~nends that when 
Cone in is contacted again, he 
be authorized to say that the 
U.S. will not thwart a coup, 
that we are willing to review 
plans, and that we will con-
tinue support to a successor 
r egime . 
His identity having been com-
promised in recent press stories 
about internal pol icy struggles 
in the U.S. mission, CIA Chief 
of Station, John Richardson, 
is recalled to Washington . 
Washington clarifies its views 
on a coup by stating that the 
U. S. will not thwB.rt such a 
move if it offers prospects 
of a more effective fight against 
the VC. 
Security and denia-
bility of all contacts i s para-
mount. 
The newly elected National 
Assembly convenes to hear 
Diem's State of the Union 
address . 
Diem speaks mainly 
of Vietnam's past progress under 
his rule , playing down the 
current political crisis and 
making only scant r eference to 
U.S. aid. 
Mme Nhu arrives in the U.S. 
from Europe for a three-week 
speaking tour . 
She i mmedi-
ately launches into vituperative 
attacks on the U.S. and its 
role in Vietnam. 
The UN General Assembly, after 
a strong debate with many voices 
denouncing Diem' s anti-Buddhist 
policy, votes to send a fact-
finding team to Saigon to 
investigate the charges of 
r epr ession . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
10 Oct 1963 
17 Oct 1963 
22 Oct 1963 
23 Oct 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUME1TT 
CAS officer meets 
Minh 
GVN informed of aid 
cut-off to special 
forces 
Depe,rtment of State, 
INR Research Memo 
RFE90 
Harkins sees Don 
CAS agent meets Don 
xxiv 
DESCRIPTION 
A CAS officer reportedly meets 
with Minh and conveys the U. S. 
position that it will neither 
encom·age nor thvlart a coup 
attempt, but would hope to be 
informed about it . 
Acting for the Ambassador, General 
Stillwell, MACV J-3, informs 
Secretary Thuan that U. S. aid 
for the special forces units 
responsible for the Aug 21 
raids is being suspended un-
til they are transferred to 
the field and placed under 
J GS command. 
The State Department publishes 
a controversial research memor-
andum which takes issue with 
the Pentagon ' s optimistic 
r eading of the statistical 
indicators on the progress 
of the war . 
The memo states 
that certain definitely nega-
tive and ominous trends can 
be identified . 
General Harkins sees General 
Don, and in a conversation 
whose interpretation is subse-
quently disputed, tells him 
that U. S. officers should not 
be approached about a coup 
as it distracts them from 
thei.r job, fighting the VC . 
Don takes it as U. S. discour -
agement of a coup . 
General Don reneivS contact with 
Conein to ask for clarifica-
tion of U. S. policy after 
Harkins ' statement to him 
of the previous day . 
Cone in 
r epeats Washington guidance , 
which relieves Don . 
Conein 
asks for proof of the exis -
tence of the coup and its plan; 
Don promises to provide politi-
cal organization plan as proof 
the following day . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
24 Oct 1963 
25 Oct 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENf 
Diem invites Lodge to 
Dalat 
1st CAS agent meeting 
with Don 
2nd CAS agent meeting 
with Don 
UN fact-finding team 
arrives in Saigon 
CAS Saigon message 
1964 
DESCRIPTION 
Diem extends an invitation 
to Lodge and his wife to spend 
Sunday, Oct 27, with him at 
his villa in Dalat . 
Lodge is 
pleased, Diem has come to him. 
Conein meets vii th Don in the 
morning and the latter reports 
that Harkins had corrected his 
previous r emarks and apologized 
for any misundersta.nding . 
The coup is set to take place 
before Nov 2 and he will meet 
Conein later that day to re-
vie"l'T the plans . 
In the evening, Don tells Conein 
that the coup committee voted 
not to reveal any plans because 
of concern about security 
leaks. 
He promises to tUrn 
over to Conein for Lodge's 
Eyes Only the operation plan 
two days before the coup occurs. 
The UN fact-finding team arrives 
in Saigon and begins its in-
vestigation. 
Lodge argues that the time has 
come to go ahead with a coup 
and we should not th"l'rart the 
maturing plot. 
He takes strong 
exception to Harkins reserva-
tions about the determination 
and ability of the plotters 
to carry off the coup . 
CAP message 63590 
Bundy, replying for the White 
House, is concerned about the 
dangers of U. S. support for 
a coup that fails . 
We must 
be in a position to judge the 
prospects for the coup plan 
and discourage any effort with 
likelihood of failure . 
xxv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
26 Oct 1963 
27 Oct 1963 
28 Oct 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Vietnamese National 
Day 
Lodge- Diem meeting 
Buddhist suicide 
Don contacts Lodge 
DESCRIPTION 
Diem reviews the troops in 
the National Day parade before 
scant cro"i'Tds 1<Tith Lodge and 
all other diplomatic personnel 
in attendance . 
The coup had 
originally been scheduled for 
thi s day . 
As plaJ:1...ned, Lodge travels to 
Dalat with Diem and engages 
in a day-long conversation 
that produces little results. 
Diem makes his standard com-
plaints against the U. S., and 
whenever Lodge asks what he is 
planning t o do about specific 
U.S. requests , he changes the 
subject . 
At one point, he 
does inquire, however , about 
resumption of the conunercial 
import program . 
Lodge asks 
what movement he will make on 
our requests . 
Diem changes 
the subj ect . 
Lodge ' s feelings 
of frustration confirm his con-
viction that we cam10t work 
with Diem. 
A seventh Buddhi st monk commits 
suicide by fire . 
At the airport in the morning 
prior to departing for the 
dedication of an atomic energy 
facility in Dalat, General Don 
approaches Lodge and asks i f 
Cone in is authorized to speak 
for the U.S. 
Lodge says yes . 
Don then affirms the need for 
the coup to be completely Viet-
namese. 
Lodge agr ees , but when 
he asks about timing, Don re-
plies that the generals are 
not yet ready. 
CAS agent meets Don 
That evening Conein meets Don 
again and the latter says that 
the plans may be available for 
Lodge only four hours before 
xxvi 
TOP SECRET - Sensi ti.ve 
DATE 
29 Oct 1963 
30 Oct 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVEl'lT OR DOCUMENT 
CINCPAC alerts 
task force 
NSC meeting 
Special forces trans-
ferred from Saigon 
MACV messages 2028, 
2033, and 2034 
xxvii 
DESCRIPrION 
the coup. 
Lodge should not 
change his plans to go to 
Washington on Oct 31 as this 
would tip off the palace . 
Some deta,ils of the organi-
zation of the coup committee 
are discussed. 
CINCPAC alerts a naval and 
air task force to stand off 
Vietnam for possible evacua-
tion of American dependents 
and civilians if required. 
A decision is made at the 
NSC meeting to have Lodge 
fully inform Harkins on the 
coup Pbtting and arrangements, 
since if Lodge leave~ Harkins 
will be in charge, 
Concern 
is also r egistered at the 
differing views of the two 
men toward a coup. 
In the first preparatory act 
of the coup, General Dinh orders 
Colonel Tung ' s special rorces 
out of Saigon for maneuvers . 
It is unclear whether the ac-
tion came as a part of the 
generals ' coup or 1~u ' s pseudo , 
coup. 
Belatedly apprised of the con-
tinuing contacts with the 
generals and the U.S. role 
in the coup plotting, General 
Harkins dispatches three angry 
cables to Taylor in which he 
disagrees with Lodge ' s inter-
pretation of the U. S, policy. 
He understands it to be no 
active covert encouragement . 
He opposes personally a coup 
and doesn ' t think the generals 
have the forces to pull one off. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
31 Oct 1963 
}- Nov 1963 
10: 00 a .m. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
CAS Washington 
message 79109 
CAS Saigon 
message 2063 
CAS Washington 
message 79407 
Lodge defers 
departure 
Lodge and Felt meet 
,'lith Diem 
xxviii 
DESCRIPTION 
The White House is now genuinely 
concerned at the Saigon dispute 
and tells Lodge it believes 
He still have the power to 
call off the coup if vie choose 
to . 
Lodge replies to Wa,shington 
that he is powerless to stop 
the coup, the matter is en-
tirely in Vietnamese hands. 
Harkins does not concur. 
To clear the air and redefine 
U. S. policy, Washington sent 
another cable to Lodge . 
The 
U.S. cannot accept as a policy 
position that it has no power 
to prevent the coup. If the 
coup does not have high pros-
pects of success, Lodge should 
i ntercede with the generals 
to have it delayed or called 
off. 
More detailed informa-
tion on the plans is urgently 
requested . 
Specific instruc-
tions to guide U.S. action 
during a coup are issued . 
They prescribe strict non-
involvement and somewhat less 
strict neutrality. 
Lodge, who had been scheduled 
to leave for Washington for 
high-level conferences, defers 
his departure because of the 
tense atmosp~ere and the appar-
ent imminence of the coup . 
Admiral Felt, who i s visiting, 
and Lodge calIon Diem, who 
reiterates many of the points 
he made to McNamara a month 
earlier . 
At the end of the 
meeting, Diem takes Lodge aside 
and indicates he is ready to 
talk about 'vhat the U. S. wants 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
Late 
morning 
12:00 a.m. 
1: 45 p .m. 
2 :00 p.m. 
4:00 p.m. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
, TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Coup units begin 
to deploy 
Officers meet at JGS 
U. S. notified 
Key installations 
taken 
First skirmishes, 
Diem told to surrender 
xxix 
DESCRIPTION 
him to do. 
Felt leaves Saigon 
after the meeting . 
The first coup units begin to 
deploy in and around Saigon. 
The coup committee has con-
vened a meeting of all senior 
Vietnamese officers except 
Generals Dip~ and Cao at JGS. 
There they are informed of 
the coup and asked to support 
i t . All except Colonel Tung 
do. 
Their pledges of support 
are taped. 
Tung is taken into 
custody later to be executed . 
The CNO "ras killed en route 
by an escort . 
A CAS officer 
is invited to the JGS and main'~ 
tains telephone contact with 
the Emba,s sy throughout t he 
coup. 
General Don calls General Stillwell, 
J-3 to General Harkins , and i n-
forms him that the coup is 
under "ray . 
About this time coup forces 
are seizj,ng the key i nstalla-
tions in Saigon, including 
the post office , police head-
.quarters , radio stations , air-
port, naval headquarters, etc. 
They ,',ere also deploying for 
attacks on the palace and the 
palace guard barracks and to 
block any counter-attack from 
outside the city . 
By about this time the first 
skirmish was taking place at 
the palace and guard barracks . 
Failing to r each General Dinh, 
Diem and Nhu r ealize the coup 
is serious . 
The generals called 
shortly after this and told the 
two brothers t o surrender . 
They refused. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
4:30 p.m. 
5:00 p .m. 
8:00 p.m. 
9:00 p.m. 
2 Nov 1963 
3:30 a.m. 
6:20 a .m. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Coup broadcast, Diem 
calls Lodge 
Generals again call 
Diem to demand 
surrender 
Diem and Nhu flee 
Palace bombarded 
Assault on the pa18.ce 
begins 
Diem calls generals 
to surrender 
xxx 
DESCRIPTION 
The generals go on radio, 
announce the coup and demand 
the resignation of Diem and 
Nhu. 
At the same tj~e, Diem 
is calling Lodge . 
He asks 
Lodge where the U. S. stands . 
Lodge replies that the U. S. 
cannot yet have a view . 
He 
expresses concern for Diem!s 
safety, and the conversation 
ends there . 
Repeated calls are now made 
to the palace to get Diem to 
surrender. All the generals 
try. 
Colonel Tung is put 
on the phone and tells Diem 
he is a captive . 
Tung is then 
taken outside and executed . 
Diem and Nhu now frantically 
call all unit commanders but 
can find none loyal. 
Outside 
sporadic firing continues . 
Sometime in the early evening, 
probably about eight o !clock, 
the two brothers escape from 
the palace through one of the 
secret underground passages 
constructed for just such 
emergencies. 
They are met 
by a Chinese friend vlho takes 
them to a previously prepared 
hideaway in Cholon. 
There they 
spend the night in telephone 
contact with the palace . 
At about nine o!clock, the 
attackers launch e.n artillery 
and armored barrage on the 
palace and its defenders which 
l ast s through the night. 
The tank and infantry assault 
on the Gia Long palace begins . 
Diem calls General Don from 
the Cholon hideout to surrender, 
but does not tell his location . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
6:30 a.m. 
6:45 a.m. 
6:50 a.m. 
afternoon 
3 Nov 1963 
4 ·Nov 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
Palace falls 
Diem and Nhu again 
escape 
Diem and Nhu are 
captured 
Vice President Tho 
confers on ne"l'l 
government 
Lodge meets with 
Generals Don and Kim 
Lodge meets with 
General Minh 
xxxi 
DESCRIPTION 
Realizing the hopelessness of 
the situation, Diem issues 
a cease fire order to the palace 
guard and the palace falls to 
the i nsurgents . 
Colonel Thao, 
the con®ander of the attacking 
forces, learns of Diem ' s where -
abouts and "l'lith JGS permission 
goes to arrest him. 
Arriving at the Cholon house, 
Thao calls JGS and is over-
heard by the brothers who 
escape to a nearby Catholic 
church. 
Diem again calls Genera,l Don 
and surrenders, this time un-
conditionally. 
He and Nhu are 
taken prisoner shortly there-
after and are murdered in the 
back of an a,rmored personnel 
carrier en route to JGS . 
Vice President Tho enters into 
intensive conferences and nego-
tiations with the coup cOD®ittee 
on the composition of a new 
interim government which he 
will head. 
Generals Don and Kim call on 
Lodge at the Embassy and apolo-
gize for the absence of Minh 
who is closeted with Tho working 
on the composition of the new 
government . 
A t"lvo-tiered govern-
ment is expected . A military 
cOD®ittee chaired by General 
Minh will supervise a largely 
civilian cabinet under Tho's 
Prime Ministership . 
Lodge 
promises the iD®ediate restora-
tion of aid programs and assures 
the generals of forthcoming 
U.S. recognition . 
On instructions from Washington, 
Lodge meets with Minh and Don 
and urges them to make a clari-
fying statement on the deaths 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
5 Nov 1963 
6 Nov 1963 
7 Nov 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVEN'l' OR DOCUiYEENT 
New government 
announced 
Composition of the 
Military Revolutionary 
Council announced 
1~ makes post- coup 
policy statement 
Brent meets with Tho 
on U. S. aid 
xy.xii 
DESCRIPI'ION 
of Diem and Nhu to allay 
anxieties about the new leaders. 
Minh promises to do so and 
to armounce the nevl government 
soon. 
The nel'/' government is announced 
with Minh as President and 
Chief of the Military Comrrlittee. 
Tho is Premier, Minister of 
Economy and Minister of Finance . 
Don is Minister of Defense and 
Dinh is Minister of Security. 
Most other posts are filled 
by civilians, but there is 
a noticeable absence of well-
known opponents to Diem. 
A 
later announcement suspends 
the 1956 constitution, and 
outlines the structure and 
functions of the new interim 
government . 
Saigon Radio announces the 
composition of the new Mili-
tary Revolutionary Council 
with Minh as Chairman and 
including all important 
generals except Khanh . 
In a post-coup policy state-
ment, the NLF lists eight de-
mands of the new regime , all 
but one of which the Minh-Tho 
Government ,vas going to do 
anyway . 
USOM Director Brent meets with 
Tho "rho indicated that all 
economic aid questions would 
be handled directly by his 
office . It was further agreed 
that a high-level Vietnamese 
commission 'Ivould work with a 
similar group in the U. S. mission 
to establish economic and aid 
policies and levels . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
DATE 
8 Nov 1963 
9 Nov 1963 
12 Nov 1963 
17 Nov 1963 
20 Nov 1963 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
EVENT OR DOCUMENT 
U. S. recognizes new 
government 
Embassy Saigon message 
986 
CINCPAC message to JCS 
120604z 63 
NLF releases stronger 
set of demands 
Honolulu Conference 
xxxiii 
DESCRIPTION 
Lodge calls on the new Foreign 
Minister, Pham Dang Lam, and 
preseDts a note of U.S . recog-
nition. 
The new goverD~ent 
will be heavily dependent on 
the U.S. in all areas . 
In the weekly progress report , 
the mission notes the greatly 
increased VC activity in the 
week follovring the coup . 
The 
return of coup units to the 
field '¥Till reverse this trend, 
it is hoped. 
CINCPAC takes note that the 
statistical indicators for the 
'¥Tar (VC atta,cks, weapons loss 
ratio, VC defections) show 
deterioration dating back to 
the summer. 
Its first set of demands baving 
been effectively preempted by 
the new Min..h Government, the 
NLF release a new and stronger 
set of demands including that 
the U.S. influence be eliminated, 
the fighting be halted and that 
a coalition 'government be estab-
lished. 
For the first time 
the NLF states that reunifica-
tion of Vietnam is an objective . 
The entire country team meets 
with Rusk, McNamara., Taylor, 
Bundy, and Bell to review the 
current situation . 
Lodge 
voices optimism about the new 
government, but notes the in-
experience of the ne'¥T l eaders. 
He should not press them too 
hard. 
He should secondl.y pledge 
aid to them in at l east the 
amounts vle were giving it to 
Diem. 
Brent notes the economic 
naivety of the generals and 
indicates the need for greater 
U. S. technical assistance to 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
~4~L.- .:r Y j' J// ~~;/,c..vr1 
...e..~de. V..c. .. G 
· DATE 
.' 
22 Nov 1963 
23 Nov 1963 
1 L. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensit'ive 
EVENT OR DOCUME.tIJ"T 
Press release 
after Honolulu 
Conference 
Lodge confers with 
the President 
NSAN 273 
xxxiv 
DESCRIPrION 
the govern.ment. 
Ha.rkins r 
a~sess ment is guardedly opti-
. mistic, taking note of the 
'higher than average VC activity 
in the i'Teek after the coup. 
The determination of the new 
leaders impressed him, but he 
"Tas concerned about the dis -
ruptions that wholesale replace-
ments of province and district 
chiefs might have . 
The press relea.se gives few 
details but does reiterate the 
U.S. intention to Hithdraw 
1,000 troops by the end of 
the year. 
Having flOioJn to Hashington 
the day after the conference, 
Lodge meets id.th the President 
and presumably continues the 
kind of report given in Honolulu . 
Dravring together the results 
of the Honolulu Conference and 
Lodg7' , s meeting idth the ,P1.;esi-
dent , NSAlvl 273 reaffirms : the 
U.S. commit:nent to defeat the 
VC in South Vietna..1Jl.. 
It rei ter-
ates the plan to ·vrithdre.i·[ 1)000 
troops by year ' s end and to end 
the Har in the first't~ree corps 
areas by the end 'o~ 1964 ~nd 
in the Delta by the end ·~ f 1965 . 
u. S. support for the nevl regime 
is confirmed a,n.d a:i.d in at least 
the amou.l1ts g;t ve:1 to Die:n is 
guaranteed . 
The Delta is to 
be the area of c cncen~~at ion 
for all r:cilitary, po ",,i t i ca.l, 
econo f.1_~c and socie,le::'forts. 
And clandest in~ o}>2Yations . 
against the North and into' 
laos are authorized . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.. . 
. ',,:" 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensi t i ve 
THE OVERTHROH OF HGO D Il~H DIEM 
TABLE OF Cm~TEI;TS Mill OlYi'LIHE 
I" 
II~'l.lRODD·CrpIOr~ ..... " " , " , , " " , " , " " " , " , " , , , , , , , , , , , , " , " " e " " " " " 
" " " " , 
" 
1 
II. 
THE BUDDHIST CRISIS: MAY 8 - AUGUST 21. ..•..•••••••..••• •·••· 
4 
1. 
The Cris i s Er 'Llpts """""""""""""""""" " """"""" .. "",, .. ,,"" .. """ .. ,, 
4 
2 . 
The U. S. liFo Alternat i v e s to Di emll Policy................ 
7 
III. 
LODGE vs. DIE~ : AUGUST 20 - 0CTOB1R 2 ••••••.•.•••••••••• ·••••·• 
12 
IV. 
1. 
The Pagoda TIai ds and Reper cussions •.•.••••.•••....• •••••· 
12 
2. 
Mi s..".Coup " " " " " .. " " " .. " " .. " " " " .. " .... " " " " " " ...... " " " .. " " " .. " .. " .... " " .... " " 
17 
3. 
Toward a l,ley.l Policy ."""" .. """""""" .... " .. " .. "" .... """""" .. ,,"""",, .. 
21 
4. 
The McNamar a-Tayl or Mi ssion •••.••••..•• ··•••••··••••••··• 
30 
THE COUP i.ffi.TURES - OCTOBER 2 - l'WV}.!;llliER 1. .................. . 
37 
1. 
The South Vietname se Situation i n October ••.•.•••.••• •••• 
37 
2. 
The Eew American Policy .•.••.•.•.••••••.•.•••••.•.••••••• 
3. 
Renevled Coup Plott i ng ••••••••••••••••• •·•••••·•••••••••·• 
37 
41 
V. 
THE COUP .Mill I TS AFl'ERM.ATH - nOVEMBER 1 - 23 •••••• ••·•••••·•• 
52 
1. 
The Coup ...... """" .... """""" .. """" .. " .... " .. " .. "" .. """ .. " .. " ...... """""",,.. 
52 
2. 
Establishment of an Int erim Regime ••.•••••.••.•• •••••·••• 
60 
3. 
The Honolulu Conf er ence and NSAM 273 •••••.••• ••·•••·••••• 
65 
a 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. B. 5. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECFET - Sensitive 
THE OVERTI-JROW OF TWO DINE DIEM 
MA.Y-NOVEHBER 1963 
, 
I 
INTRODUCTI01'T 
I n the spring of 1963, the regime of Ngo Dinh Diea seemed to exhibit 
no more signs of advanced decay or j.lllminent demise than might have been 
di scerned since 1958 or 1959. 
Only i n hindsight can certail1 developments 
be identj.fied as salient . 
Of these, certainly the steadily i ncreasing 
i nfluence of the Nhus I.Tas the most ominous . 
Nhu came more and more to 
dominate Diem in the l ast year of the Diem J.'ule . 
But as his pOvrer 
i ncreased, Nhu I s grip on r eality seems to have slipped a'1d he was 
reported in that l ast year to have been smoking opi um. and to have been 
mental ly ill. Y 
Meamlhile, Mme . Nhu viaS developing a power obsession 
of her m·m . 
The catastrophic effect of their i nfluence during the ensuing 
crisis, hO'tTever, was h a.pos sible to have predicted . 
As one percep-Uve 
observer noted, the Ngo fanily !!ha d come to pm{er vlith a well-developed 
persecution complex and had subsequently developed a positive mani a 
for survivaL !! ?/ 
Anot her source of concerh should have been the regime ' s sel f -
i mposed isolation from the populace . 
It had left the peasants apathetic , 
a cause for real concern i n a struggl e vrith the zealOUS , doctri n6.ire 
Viet Cong; but, more importantly, it had alienated l arge porti ons of 
t he restive urban population wl,o felt I:l0St directly the impact of the 
r egime ' s arbitrary rule. 
The regi;:ne , i n fact , had no r eal base of 
political support and relied on the l oyalty of a handful of key military 
commanders to keep it in pOvTer by fore stalling any overthrow'. 
The l oyalty 
of these men I{as bought with promotions and favors . 
Graft and corruption 
should also have dralm concern, even if governmental dishonesty was 
endemic i n ASia, and probably not disproport j.onate at that time i n South 
Vietnam . 
It vTaS not, hovrever, the strains that these problems had placed 
on the Vietnamese polit ical structure that ',Tere ultimately decisive . 
The f undamental Iveakness of the Diem r egime ,Tas the curious rigidity 
a nd political insensitivity of i ts mandarin styl e in the face of a 
dramatic crisis of popular confidence . 
With regard to the var, the consensus of the U.S. military mission 
and the U.S . i ntelligence communi t y in the spring of 1963 vTaS that the 
military situation in South Vietnam I-TaS steadily improving and t he wal' 
1-TaS beginning to be won . 
A National I ntelli gence Estimate in April 1963 
concluded that t he infusion of U.S. advisors had begun to have the 
desired effect of strengthening t he AR"VN and increasing its aggressive -
ness . ]/ The Viet Cong retaLQed good strength, but could be cont a i ned 
1 
TOP SECRET -
S~1 SITIV~ 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
by the ARVN i f they did not receive a great increase in external support. 
Statistical ina.ices shoved a decline in Viet Cong attacks from the 
previous year, increased ARVN offensive acti vi ty, a..nd improvement j.n the 
weapons loss ratio. 
Continuing problems vere Diem's loyal ty.·based officer 
promotion policy, ARVN desertions and AWOL's , poor intelligence, and lov 
grade NCO ' s and company grade officers. Nonetheless, the overall out-
look i-laS sangu.ine. Particular reason for encouragement was the adoption 
i n February 1963 of the National Campaign Plan urged by the U.S, 
The 
hopefu.l prospects were smnmarized for Secretary XcNamara in a briefing 
paper for the Honolulu Conference of Nay 6: 
The over-all situation in Vietn81ll is improving. 
In the 
mili tar,;! sector of the counterinsurgency, we are vinning, 
Evidences of improvement are clearly visible, as the com·· 
bined impact of the programs vThich involve a l ong lead 
time begin to have effect on the Viet Congo ~/ 
Even as seasoned an observer of insurgency as Sir Robert Thompson, Chief 
of the British Advisory J'l'lissioD, vTaS able to report that, "Irovr, in March 
1963, I caD say, and in this I am su.pported by all members of the miSSion, 
that the GoverPJUent is beginning to win the shooting war against the 
Viet Cong. If '2/ 
One reason for the optimism of these appraisals vas the vigor vIi th 
which the government, under the direction of Nhu, was pushing the 
Strategic Harnlet Program. 
Nhu had been initially cool to the i dea, but 
once he established the U.S, Hillingness to fund the program, he focused 
on it as the princi pal vehicle of the cou:.nterinsurgency campaign and as 
an excellent means of extending the oligarchy's control into the country-
side . 
In April the GVN claimed it had completed 5,000 strategic hamlets 
and had another 2,000 under construction. 6/ There vas already official 
U. S. misgiving, hovever, about the quality-of many of the hamlets and 
about overextension of the country's limited human r esources in the 
program's frantic rate of expansion . 
Nevertheless, field reports seemed 
to support the success of the program which was seen as the key to the 
struggl e a.gainst the Viet Congo 
U. S. -GVN relations in the spring of 1963 were beginning to shovT signs 
of accumulating stress. 
As the U.S. commitment and involvement deepened, 
frictions behreen American advisors and Vietnamese cOll..nterparts at all 
levels increased . 
Diem, under the influence of Nhu, compl ained about 
the quantity and zeal of U. S. advisors. 7/ They were creating a coloni al 
impression among the people, he said. 
Diem chose to dramatize his com-
plaint by delaying agreement on the commitment of South Vietnamese funds 
for joint counterinsurgency projects. 8/ The issue was eventually 
resolved, but the sensitivity to the growing U.S. presence remai ned and 
as the long crisis SUJDIDer wore on, it gradually became a deep.·seated 
suspicion of U.S . motives. 
The report of the t·1aDsfield mission, published in March, further 
exacerbated relations between the hro countries. 
Diem and Nhu vrere 
2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
parti cul arly incensed by i ts praise of Cambodian neutralism and 
cri tici sm of Jcheir regime . 
Coup rumors began to circul ate again that 
spring, and the prevailing palace state of mind hearkened back to 
suspicions of U.S . complicity in the abortive 1960 coup . 9/ 
~lme . Nhu 1s 
ascerbic publ ic criticism of the Uni ted States was a furthe r source of 
f rict ion. 
By Nay 1963, these problems in U.S . -GVN rel ations were 
al ready substantial enough to preoccupy officials of both governments . 
'vi thi n a matter of weeks, hovever, events thrust them into the back-
ground of a far more serious crisis . 
3 
TOP SECRET - Sensi t i ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET .. Sensi ti ve 
II 
THE BUTImnST CRISIS: 
M.ll.Y 8 - AUGUST 21 
1. 
The Crisis Erupts 
The i ncident in Hue on May 8, 1963, that precipitated }That came 
to be called the Buddhist crisis, and that started the chain of events 
that ultimately led to the overthrOiv of the Diem regime and the murder 
of the Ngo brothers, happened both inadvertently and unexpectedly. 
No one then foresavr that it 'vould generate a national opposition move-
ment capable of r allying virtually all non-communist dissidence in 
South Vietnam. 
Nore importantly, no one then appreciated the degree 
of alienation of Vietnam ' s people from their government, nor the extent 
of the political decay within the regime, a regime no longer capable of 
coping '·Tith popular disconter.t. 
The religious origins of the incident are traceable to the massive 
flight of Catholic r efugees from North Vietnam after the French defeat 
i n 1954. 
An estimated one million Catholics fled the North and r esettled 
in the South. 1::/ 
Diem, animated, no doubt, by religious as lvell as 
humanitarian sympatby, and with an eye to recruiting political support 
from his coreligionists, accorded these Catholic refugees preferenti al 
treatment in l and redistribution, relief and assistance, commerci al 
and export-import licenses, government employment, and other GVH l argess. 
Because Diem could r ely on their loyalty, they came to fill almost all 
imp or t a..l1t civilian and military positions. 
As an i nstitution, the 
Catholic Church enjoyed a special legal status. 
The Catholic primate, 
Ngo Dinh Thuc, was Diem's brother and advisor . 
But prior to 1962, there 
had been no outright discrimination against BudcLhists. 
However, among 
South Vietnam's 3-4 million practicing Buddhists and the 80% of the 
population }Tho }Tere nominal B,uddhists, the regime's favoritism, 
authori taria..l1ism, and discrimination created a smoldering resentment. 
In April 1963, the goverp..ment ordered provincial officials to 
enforce a longstanding but generally ignored ban on the public display 
of religious flags. 
The order came just after the officially encouraged 
celebrations in Hue commemorating the 25th anniversary of the ordination 
of Ngo Dinh Thuc, t he Archbishop of Hue, during which Papal flags had 
been prominently flown. 
The order also came, as it happened, just prior 
to Buddha 's birthday (1)lay 8) -- a major Buddhist festival. 
Hue, an old 
provincial capital of Vietnam, }TaS the only real center of Buddhist 
learning and scholarship in Vietnam and its university had long been a 
center of left-wing dissidence. 
Not su~prisingly, then, the Buddhists in 
Hue defifu'1tly flew their flags in spite of the order and, when the local 
administration appeared to have backed do}m on the ban, }rere emboldened 
to hold a previously scheduled mass meeting on May 8 to commemorate 
Buddha ' s birthday. 
Seeing the demonstration as a challenge to f amily 
prestige (Hue was also the capital of the political fief of another Diem 
4 
TOP SECFBT - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECF.ET - SensiU ve 
brother, Ngo Dinh Ca...Yl) and to goverPJllent aut hority, loca l officials 
tried to disperse the cr01fds . 
vlhen preliminary efforts produced no 
results , the Catholic deputy province chief ordered his troops to fire . 
In t he ensu i ug melee, nine persons were killed, i ncluding some children, 
and fourt een vTere i n jured. 
Armored vehicle s allegedly crushed some of 
the victims. 
The Diem government subsequently put out a story that a 
Viet Cong agent had thrown a grenade i nto the crm-Td and that the victims 
had been crushed i n a 
stamped~
. 
It steadfastly r ef1..'..sed to admit 
responsibili ty even i·rhen neutral observers produced films showing 
government troops firing on the crovTd. 
Diem! s m8 . .ndari n character "Tould not permit him to handl e this 
crisis vTi th the kind of flexi bility and finesse it required . 
He wa s 
i ncapable of publicly acknmoTledgi ng respcmsibili ty for the tragedy and 
seeking to conciliate the angry Buddhists. 
He "Ta s convinced that such 
a public loss of f ace would undermine his authority to rule, oblivious 
to the f act that no modern r Lller can long i gnore massive popular dis-
affection "rhatever his ovm particul ar personal virtues may be . 
So the 
government clung t enaciously to its version of what had occurr ed. 
The following day in Hue over 10,000 people demonstrated in protest 
of the killings. It wa s the first of the long series of protest activities 
vTith "rhich the Buddhists were to pressure the regime i n the next four 
months . 
The Buddhists r apidly organize d themselves, and on May 10, a 
manifesto of the Buddhist c l ergy ioTaS tra nsmitted to the government demand-
ing freedom to fly their flag, legal equality with the Catholic Church, 
an end of arrests and freedom to practice their beliefs, and indemnifica -
tion of the victims of the l-Iay 8th incident with punishment for its 
perpetrators . 2/ These five demands 'fere officially presented to 
President Diem-on May 15, and the Buddhists held their first press con-
ference after the meeting. 
Publicized hunger strikes and meetings con-
tinued throughout },:ay, but 'Diem continued to drag his feet on placating 
the dissenters or settling issues . 
On Hay 30, about 350 Buddhist 
monks demonstrated in front of the National Assembly in Saigon, and a 
48-hour hunger strike vas anno1..llced . 
On June 3, a demonstration in Hue 
vas broken up loTi th tear gas and several people were burned, prompting 
charges that the troops had used mustard gas. 
On June 4, the govern-
ment announced the appointment of an interministerial committee headed 
by Vice President· Tho to resolve the religious issue , but by this time 
such gestures ,·rere probably too l ate . 
Large portions of the urban 
population had rallied to the Buddl1ist protest, recognizing in it the 
beginnings of genuine politica l opposition to Diem. 
On June 8, Mme . 
Nhu exacerbated the problem by announcing that the Buddhists were 
i nfiltrated by communists . 
Throughout the early days of the crisis, the U. S. press had closely 
covered the events and brought them to the attention of the "\-lOrld. 
On 
J une 11, the press vms tipped off to be at a dovmtollD. intersection at 
noon . 
Expecting another protest demonstration, they vTere horrified to 
vitness the first burning suicide by a Buddhist monk. 
Thich Quang Duc ' s 
fiery death shocked the "rorld and electrified South Vietnam. 
5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Negotiations had been taking place bet"i·reen Vice President Tho IS 
commi ttee and the Buddhists since June 5, vli th considerable acrimonious 
public questioning of good f aith by both sides. 
After the suicide, the 
U.S. intensified. its already consi derabl e pressure on the government to 
mollify the Buddhists, and to bring the deteriorating political si tua ·· 
tion under control. Finally, on June 16, a joint GVN-Buddhist communique 
,vas released outlining the elements of a settlement, but affixing no 
responsibility for the Hay 8 i ncident. 
Violent suppression by the GVN 
of rioting the next day, hOvTever, abrogated the spirit of the Hgreement. 
The IIThus, for their part, immedi ately undertook to sabotage the agreement 
by secretly calling on the GVl'T-sponsored youth organiz2,tions to denounce 
it. 
By late June , it was apparent that the agreement was not meant as 
a genuine gesture of conciliation by Diem, but was only an effort to 
appease the U. S. and paper over a steadily widening fissure in internal 
poli tics. 
The evident lack of faith on the part ,of the government in the 
June 16 agreement discredited the conciliatory policy of moderation that 
t he older BUddhist l eadership had folloved until that time. 
In late 
J une , leadership of the Buddhist movement passed to a Y01mger, more 
radical set of monks , with more far.-reaching political objectives . 
They 
made i ntelligent a11.d skil lful political uS,e of a r i si ng tide of popul ar 
support . 
Carefully planned mass meetings and demonstrations were accom-
panied ioTi th a..v:t aggressive press campaign of opposition to the regime . 
Seizing on the importa..11.ce of America..11. news media, t hey cul tivated U.S. 
nevlsmen, tipped them off to demonstrations and rallies, and carefully 
timed their activities to get maximum press coverage. 
Not surprisingly, 
t he l\Tgo family reacted .lith ever more severe suppression t o the Buddhist 
activists, and with acrimonious crit icism and even t hreats to the _American 
newsmen . 
Early i n July, Vice P:r:esident Tho I S committee annOlmced that a 
prel iminary i nvestigation of the lilay 8 i ncident had confirmed that the 
deaths '\fere the result of an act of Viet Cong terrorism. 
Outraged, the 
Buddhists denounced the findings and i ntensifi ed their protest activities . 
On J ul y 19, Q.YJ.o,er U. S. pressure, Diem made a brief t wo-minute radio 
address , ostensibly an expression of conciliation to the Buddhists , but 
so '\fri tten and coldl y delivered as t o destroy i n advance any effect its 
announced minor concessions mi ght have had . 
Wi thin the regime, Hhu and his wife were severel y critiCizing Diem 
for caving in under Buddhist pressure . 
lv'Ime . Nhu publ i cly ridiculed t he 
Buddhist suicide as a IIbarbecue," accused the Buddhist l eaders of bei ng 
i nfjltrated with communists, and construed the protest movement as Viet 
Cong inspired. 
Both Nhu and his w'ife vrorked publicly and pri vatel y to 
undermine Diem1s feebl e effor ts at compromise with t he Buddhists, and 
r umor s t hat Nhu YTas conSideri ng a coup agai nst his br other began t o 
ci rcu~ate in J ul y. 
AU. S. Special National Intelligence Estimate on tTuly 10 concl uded 
vli th the perceptive prediction that i f the Diem regime dtd nothing to 
implcmeEt the June 16 agreement and to appease the Buddhists, the 
6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
likelihood of a summer of demonstrations was great, "l-ri th the strong 
possibili ty of a non-conununist coup attempt. 3/ By mid-_"l.Ugust a week 
before Nhu l aunched general raids on Buddhist-pagodas in Saigon and 
elsewhere, the CIA had begun to note malaise in the bureau.cracy and 
the army: 
Since the Buddhist dispute with the Diem government 
erupted on 8 May, there have been a series of reports 
indicating not only intensified plotting and grumbling 
among Diem's traditional non-Communist critics, but 
renewed restiveness and grovTing diSE'..ffection in official 
civilian and military circles over Diem's handling of the 
dispute.~/ 
This estimate went on to detail numerous rumors of coup plots in existence 
since at least l ate J-une. 
But l'Jhu, in a bold move designed to frighten 
coup plotters, a..TJ.cl to throv them off guard, had called in the senior 
generals on July 11, reprimanded them for not having tal<::en action to 
squelch revolt, and questioned their loyalty to the regime. 
Ifhu's move 
seemed to have temporarily set back all plans for an overthrOl-T. 
CIA 
also reported rumors that Nhu himself "l-TaS planning a ttfalse cO"G.ptt to 
draw out a:..Gd then crush the Buddhists. '2/ . 
In August, Buddhist mili ta..TJ.cy reached new intensity j monks burned 
themselves to death on the 5th, 15th, and 18th. 
The taut political 
atmosphere in Saigon i n mid-August should have suggested to U.S. 
observers that a shovTdmill "l-TaS on the "ray. 
When the showdovffi came , hOl·r-. 
ever, in the August 21 raids on the pagodas, the U.S. mission was 
apparently caught almost completely off guard. 
2. 
The U.S. ttNo Alternatives to Diem" Policy 
The explanation of how the U.S. mission became detached from the 
realities of the political situation in Saigon in August 1963, is among 
the most ironic and tragic of our entire involvement in Vietnam. 
In 
dealing "Ti th Diem over the years, the U. S. had tried two radically 
different but ultimately equally unsuccessful approaches . 
Under 
Ambassador Elbridge D<lrbrow from the late '50s until 1961, we had used 
tough pressure tactics to bring Diem to i mplement programs and ideas we 
felt necesse_ry to mn the war against the Viet Congo 
But Diem soon 
learned that the U.S. was committed to him as the only Vietnamese l eader 
capable of rallying his country to defeat the commcmists. 
Armed vri th 
this knowledge he could defer action or ignore the Ambassador vrith 
r el ative impunity. 
He became adept at playing the role of offended 
lover. 
Thus by 1961, Durbrow was cut off from the palace, m th little 
information about '-That was going on and even l ess influence over events. 
Under Frederick Holting as U.S. Ambassador, the U.S. pursued a very 
different tactic. 
Forevrarned not to allow himself to be isolated, 
Nolting set out through the patient cultivation of Diem's friendship and 
trust to secure a role for himself as Diem's close and confidential 
advisor. 
But there had been no basic change in the American belief that 
'7 
TOP SECRET . Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Top SECRE~I - Sensi ti ve 
there ims no al ternati ve to Diem, and Diem must have quickly sensed 
this, for he continued to respond prim2.rily to family interest, at best 
only listeni ng impatiently to Nolting 's carefully put complaints, 
secure in the knowledge that ultimately the U. S. i{Quld not abandon him 
no matter i"hat he did. 
Both tactics failed because of American commi t-
mente 
No amount of pressure or suasion was likely to be effective in 
getting Diem to adopt ideas or policies vlhich he did not find to his 
liking, since we had communicated our unwillingness to consider the 
ul timate sanction -- vri thdrai·ral of support for his regime . 
We had 
ensnared ourselves in a pOi·Terless, no alternatives policy. 
The denouement of this policy, the ultimate failure of all our 
efforts to coerce , ca jole and coax Diem to be something other than the 
mandarin that he vTaS, came in the midnight attack on the pagodas on 
August 21. 
And it created a fundamental dilemma for U.S . policy with 
respect to Diem. 
On the one hand, ,vi thdravral of support for his regime 
was the only l ever likely to force Diem to redress t he Buddhist grievances 
and to make the political reforms prerequisite for popular support in the 
common fight against the Viet Congo On t he other hand, withdra'iTal of 
U. S. support for Diem vTOuld be signal U. S. approval for an anti-Diem 
coup, 'in th all its potential for political instability and erosion of 
the war effort. 
He found ourselves i n this predicament not entirely 
unexpectedly. 
. 
In May 1963, though it had failed to anticipate the Buddhist 
upheaval, the U.S. mi ssion nevertheless quickly recognized the gravity 
of the threat to Diem and reported it to "\{ashi ngton . 6/ Nolting met 
with Diem on May 18 and outlined the steps he f elt were necessary to 
retrieve the situation. 
These included a government acknowl edgement 
of r esponsibility f or t he Hue i ncident, an offer to compensate the 
f amilies of the VictimS, and a reaffirmation of r eligious equality and non-
discrimination . 
As an alternative , he suggested an investigatory commis -
sion. 
Diem IS noncommittal response l ed t he Ambassador to think that Di em 
really believed the Viet Cong had caused the deaths and that t he Buddhists 
had provoked the inci dent . 
Diem felt the U.S. was over-reacting to the 
events. 1/ Thus, at a critical time Nolting, in spite of his hTO years 
of careful groundw'ork, was unabl e to exercise any real influence over 
Diem~ Nolting left on a well-deserved holiday and home leave shortly 
after this frustrating meeti ng . 
By the end of 11ay, Hashington had become concer ned at Diem IS 
f ailure to act, and at the widening Buddhist protest. 
The Charge 
d'Affaires, ivilliam Truehart, was instruct ed to press the GVH for 
action . '§/ Horking with Secretary of State for Defense Thuan, Truehart 
tried to move the government toward negotiations vri th the Buddhists. 
After t he demonstrations in Hue on June 3, the State Department instructed 
Truehart to t ell Diem or Thuan that the U.S. also had a stake in an 
amicable settl ement vn th t he Buddhists . 9/ 
On the follmTing day, Truehart 
met wIth Thuan and told him th('1.t U. S. support of South Vietnam could not 
be maintained if there vTaS bl oody repressive action in Hue . 10/ This 
seemed to get action . 
Later that day, Truehart was i nformed-that 
8 
TOP SECR.ET - Sensi ti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
, 
Nolting's second suggestion had been adopted and a high-level commission 
had been named to settle the problem. 
The commission, headed by Vice 
President Tho, met belatedly \-lith the Buddhists on June 5. 
On June 8, Truehart had an intervie\-l vlith Diem to protest ~,Jme . 
l'lliu's public criticism of the Buddhists, which \-las poisoning the atmos-
phere for a settlement. 
Hhen Diem refused to disavow her statements, 
Truehart threatened a U.S. IIdissociation" from any future repressive 
measures to suppress demonstrations. 
Trllehart left the meeting with the 
impression that Diem was more preoccupied with security measures than 
vii th negotiations. 11/ Nol ting' s lovr··key policy had by now been abandoned, 
both in \'Tashington and in Saigon, in favor of a new tough line . 
The situation was dramatically altered by the first Buddhist suicide 
on June 11. 
Alarmed, the State Department authorized Truehart to tell 
Diem that unless drastic action was taken to meet t he Buddhist demands 
promptly, the U. S. vlov.ld be forced to state publicly its dissociation 
from the GVN on the Buddhist issue. 12/ Truehart made his demarche on 
June 12. 
Diem replied that any suchu.S. announcement vlOuld have a 
disastrous effect on the GVN-Buddhist negotiations. 13/ The negotiations 
finally got under way i n earnest June ll~ and the joint communique was 
issued June 16. 
Truehart made repeated calls on Diem in late June and early July, 
urging him in the strongest l anguage to t ake some action indicating the 
government's i ntention to abide i n good faith by the June 16 agreement . 
His efforts were unavailing . 
Diem was either noncommittal, or t alked in 
generalities about the difficulties of the problem. 
On June 27, President Kennedy named Henry Cabot Lodge to replace 
Ambassador Nolting effective in September. 
After a brief stop i n 
Washington, Nolting vTaS hurried back to Saigon on July 11 to make one 
l ast effort to get Diem to conciliate the Buddhists. 
Nolting, evidently 
resenting the pressure tactics used by True hart , met immedj.ately vri th 
Diem and tried to mollify him. 14/ He succeeded only in convincing Diem 
to make the shallow gesture of the July 19 radio speech. 
Othenrise, 
Diem merely perSisted in appeals for public harmony and support of the 
government, without any real attempt to deal vri th the Buddhist grievances. 
Nolting spent his last month in Vietnam trying to repair U. S. -GVN 
relations and to move Diem to resolve the Buddhist criSiS, but his 
attempts were continually undercut by the Nhus both publicly and pri-
vately'. 
They had grOlm i ncreasingly belligerent about the Buddhists 
during the summer, 8..11d by August spoke often of II crushing II them. 
Ifashington asked N 01 ting to prote st such inflammatory r emarks , and began 
to suspect Diem'.s capacity to conciliate the Buddhists in the face of 
Nhu sabotage . 
Nolting was instructed to suggest to Diem that Nme . Nhu 
be removed from the scene . 15/ Nolting asked Diem for a public declara-
tion repudiating her remarkS-but after i nitially agreei ng, Diem then 
demurred and postponed it. 16/ 
Finally, as a parting gesture to Nolting, 
he agreed on August ll~ to make a statement . g/ It came in t he form of 
9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3_3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
an interview with Marguerite Higgins of the Ne .. ,' York Herald Tribune. 
Diem asserted that conciliation had been his policy all along and that it 
"ras "irreyersible. II 
He further said, in direct contradiction of a 
previous remark by r-!me. Nhu, that the family "Tas pleased with Lodge 's 
appointment. 18/ Washington was apparently satisfied by this statement, 
which Diem viewed merely as a going-away present for Nolting . 19/ Less 
than a week l ater , Nolting 's two years of -careful "Tork and an Americ,m 
policy "muld be in a shambles, betrayed by Nhu ' s midnight raid on the 
pagodas. 
. 
Underlying the prevailing U.S. view- that there was no alternative 
to Diem was the belief that the disruptive effect of a coup on the .rar 
effort, and the disorga."'1ization that would follO'iv such a coup, could 
only benefit the VC, perhaps decisively. 20/ rHlitary estimates and 
reports emanating from jvUWV through the summer of 1963 continued to 
reflect an optimistic outlook, i ndicating good reason to continue our 
support of Diem even in the face of his inept handling of the Buddhist 
crisis. 21/ . In retrospect, it can be seen that by July the GVN position 
i n the war had begun to seriously deteriorate. 
At the time, hO'ivever, 
this weakening Ivas not yet apparent. 
The then prevailing view also held 
that the Buddhist crisis had not yet detracted from the war effort, 
although its potential to do so was recognized. 
Secretary McNamara on 
July 19 told a press conference that the "rar was progressing well and 
that the Buddhist crisis had thus far not affected it. 22/ 
The intel-
ligence community, however, had already begun to note depressing effects 
of the crisis on military and civilian morale . 23/ 
Meanwhile, the U. S. press corps ,-ras reporting a far different view 
of both the war and the Buddhist crisis, one which vas, i n retrospect, 
nearer the reality. 
In particular, they were reporting serious failures 
in the Delta in both military operations and the Strategic Hamlet 
Program. 24/ Typical of this reporting vas an August 15 story in the 
Nev York Times by David Halberstam presenting a very negative appraisal 
of the war in the Delta. 25/ Such reports were vehementl y refuted within 
t-he Administration, most notably by General Krulak, the JCS Special 
Assistant for Counterinsurgency. 26/ At the 10lver echel ons in the field, 
hOvreyer, there 1-Tere many U. S. advisors 'vho did not share Krulak' s 
sanguine view of the "Tar I s progress . 
-Hi thin the Administration, no real l ow-risk alternative to Diem had 
eyer been identified, and we had continued our support for his trouble-
some regime because Diem was regarded as the only Vietnamese figure 
-capable of rallying national support in the struggle against the Viet 
Cong . 
The Buddhist crisis shattered our illusions about him, and increased 
the domestic U.S. political price to Kennedy of supporting Diem. 
But 
the only other option for us seemed a coup, with highly uncertain pros-
pects for post -coup political stability. 
At a briefing for the President 
on July 4, the possibilities and prospects for a coup vere discussed . 27/ 
It ivas the consensus that the Nhus could not be r emoved, but tha.t there 
vould s-:.lrely be coup attempts in the next four months . 
Nolting's 
reported viev, with vhich then Assistant Secretary of State, Roger Hilsman, 
10 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 303 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
did not entirely agree, was that a coup would most likely produce a 
civil war. 
Hilsman felt that the likelihood of general chaos in the 
wake of a coup was less than it had been the preceding year. 
(Notes 
on this briefing, reproduced in the Appendix, provide the first docu-
mentary evidence of highest level consideration of the ramifications of 
a coup.) 
In a meeting at State the following day, July 5, Ambassador 
Nolting, \.ho had cut short his vacation to return to vlashington in the 
"¥rake of the Buddhist crisis, told Under Secretary of State George Ball = 
In his view if a revolution occurred i n Viet -Nam wohich 
gre,. out of the Buddhist si tuati 011 , the country would be 
spli t betvreen feuding factions and the .A.mericans "¥rould 
have to wi thdrmv and the country might be lost to the Com-
munists. 
This l ed to the que stion of hOI'; much pressure we 
could exert on Diem. 
Mr . Nolting replied that if we 
repudiated him on this issue his government would fall. 
The Ambassador believed that Diem would live up to the 
agreement (June 16) unless he believed that he was dealing 
with a political attempt to cause his overthrOlol. 28/ 
Earlier in the same interview he had said: 
that although interference by the Nhus vas 
serious , he believed that t he GVN would be able to come 
through thi s one slOlvly. 
As to tactic s , the more Diem 
was prodded the slovTer he went . 
Hhile Nhu \-ras trouble-
some he was chiefly responsible for gains which had been 
made in the provincial pacification program. 29/ 
Nol ting, no doubt, expressed similar views when he met vTi th SecretaT'J 
McNamara before returning to Saigon. 
In spite of the mounting political pressure on the President in 
Congress and in the press because of the Buddhi st repreSSions, the 
Administration decided to send Nolting back for another try at getting 
Diem to settle the dispute \vi th the Buddhists . 
Anxiety i n Hashington 
mounted as the summer \-rore on, and Nolting I s efforts with Diem produced 
evident progress. 
By the time of the August 21 r aids, WOashi ngton IS 
patience with Diem \-ras all but exhausted. 
11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECHET - Sensitive 
III 
LODGE vs. DIEM: : 
AUGUST 20 - OCTOBER 2 
1. 
The Pagoda Haids and Repercussions 
Shortly after midnight on August 21, six days after Nolting's 
frustrated departure, Nhu, shattering any remaining illusions about the 
GVN's conciliatory approach to the Buddhists, and betraying Diem ' s 
parting pledge to Nolting, staged a general assault on Buddhist pagodas. 
In Saigon, Hue, and other coastal cities, the regime ' s private shock 
troops -- the U. S. -trained Speci al Forces -- and the combat police 
invaded the pagodas and arrested hundreds of Buddhist monks, effectively 
destroying an JI..merican policy and marking the beginning of t he end of the 
Diem regime . 
On August 18, ten senior generals had met and decided that they 
would ask Diem for a declaration of martial law to permit them to 
return Buddhist monks from outside Saigon to their own provinces and 
pagodas, hopefully reducing tensions in the capital. 1/ _lImong those 
in attendance at the meeting were General Ton That Dinh, military 
governor of Saigon and comma..l1der of III Corps surrounding it, and 
General Huynh Van Cao, IV Corps commander, both of whom ovTed their 
positions to their loyalty to the regime. 
Either or both of them 
probably reported the outcome of this meeting to Diem and Nhu. 
In any case, Nhu had decided to eliminate. the Buddhist oppOSition, 
and to confront the U.S. with a fait accompli on Lodge 's arrival; he 
assumed the U.S. would protestingly acquiesce, as it always had in the 
past . 
On the afternoon of the 20th, :Nhu met "Ti th a small group of 
generals, i ncluding Don, Khiem, and Dinh who presented the marti al 
l aw proposal to him. 
Nhu, his ol-m plans for the raids now far advanced, 
told them to take their proposal to Diem. 
At a meeting l ater that 
evening, Diem acquiesced i n the generals ' pla..l1 and at midnight the 
decree was published under the signature of General Don, Chief of the 
Joint General Staff. 2/ Mean,,,hile, unbeknmm to the generals, Nhu had 
already alerted Colonel Tung 's Special Forces and the combat police. 
Once the facade of marti al l a", '¥Tas i n place, so the army would be blamed 
for the raids, Nhu gave the .. TOrd and the crackdown began. 
To further 
implicate the army, some of t he combat police wore paratroop uniforms. 
Pagodas i"ere ransacked in all the major South Vietnamese cities, and 
over 1400 Buddhi sts, primarily monks, were arrested. '1./ In the r aid on 
Xa Loi pagoda in Saigon about thirty monks were wounded or injured, 
and several were subsequently listed as miSSing; exact casualties were 
never established. 4/ Diem had approved the martial law decree '¥Tithout 
consulting his cabinet, but it was never established whether he kneif of 
and apPToved Nhu 's plans for the pagoda r aids . 
Significantly, he never 
subsequently sought to dissociate himself from Nhu or t he r aids . 
12 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP S~CRBT - Sensitive 
, 
vlliile the martial law decree gave General Don command of all troops, 
in fact, Gener<al Dinh and Colonel Tung took their orders directly from, 
the palace. 
Thus, when the raids came, General Don VTas at 3GS lmaware. 
In a long discussion on August 23 va th a Clill officer, he suggested that 
the martial la"T decree "Tas only phase one of a larger< Generals' plot. 5/ 
They "Tere thrOim off balance, hovrever, by the raids and by General Dinh's 
rapid assumption of local control of martial l avT in Saigon. 
In planning the raids, Nhu had been extremely careful not to have 
word l eak. to the U.S. mission (although the Buddhists and the U.S. press 
corps had been tipped off by their mID informants). 
On the morning 
after the attack, Richardson, the CIA chief and the senior .P.unerican 
civilian in Saigon, emphatically denied to Halberstam any foreknovTledge 
of the plan. 6/ To further isolat e the U.S. from an accurate assessment 
during the operation, Nhu had the telephone lines to the Embassy and the 
homes of all senior U.S. personnel cut shortly after the r aids got under 
way. 7/ His efforts had the desired effect. It vTaS several days before 
the U.S. mission in Saigon and officials in Hashington could piece 
together what happened. 
In "Hashington, Harriman and Michael Forrestal, a 
member of McGeorge Bundy's staff at the Hhite House, drafted a stiff 
public statement that "'\'Tas released by the State Department at 9: 30 the 
follo"ang morning. It deplored the raids as "a direct violation by the 
Vietnamese Goyernment of assurances that it was pursuing a policy of 
reconciliation vTith the Buddhists. " 8/ But the first U.S. intelligence 
reports, based on information from Nhu, accepted army responsibility for 
the raids, and treated their coincidence with the martial lavr decree as, 
in effect, a military coup. 
In an August 21 memorandum for the Secretary 
of Defense, the Director of DIAJ General Carroll, wrote, "Although the 
military moves are based on an alleged preSidential proclamation, the 
mili tary leaders have, in effect, assumed full control." 2/ 
When the raids occurred, Lodge, Nolting, and Roger Hilsman, the 
Assistant Secr'etary of State for the Far East, had been conferring in 
Honolulu. 
Lodge was immediately instructed to proceed to Saigon. 10/ 
After a brief stop in Tokyo, Lodge touched down in Saigon at 9:30 p.m. 
on August 22, in an atmosphere charged 1vi th tension and official U. S. 
~onfusion. Awai ting him "Tas a cable from Hilsman asking for a clarifica-
tion of the situation. 
Had the military taken over a.YJ.d retained Diem as 
a figureheadj had Diem strengthened his Ovill position by calling in the 
militaryj or were the Nhus really calling the shots? 11/ Hithin twenty-
four hours, Lodge had sent a preliminary reply: therehad been no coup, 
but there seemed also to be no diminution in the roles of the Nhus, 
although the power roles vTithin the regime were unclear. 12/ 
. That same day, the first military feelers had been put out from 
the Vietnamese generals to determine what the U.S. reaction would be to 
a military coup . 
Gener'al Don, the commander of the armed forces under 
the martial law decree, had a long, rambling conversation with a GAS 
officer. 
He first outlined the true role the army had played in the 
events of August 20-21 and then inquired why the U.S. had blamed the army 
for the raids on the pagodas : 
13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
General Don has heard personally that the military is 
being blamed by Vietnamese public for the attack on t he 
pagodas . 
He said that the US Govt i s at fault for this 
misconception because VOA announced that the military took 
action against the pagodas. 
Don queried "Thy VOA did not 
admit that Colonel Tung's Special Forces and the Police 
carried out the action . 
Don believes this would help t he 
military at this point. 
Don stated that the USA should 
nmf make its position kn01fD. l3/ 
In a conversation the same day .. lith RufuS' Phillips of USOM, General Kim, 
deputy to General Don, bitterly attacked Nhu, 
ch~rging him .. ,ith responsi-
bility for the raids, and deploring his dominant role in the government. 
He said that unless the popular impression that t he army was r esponsible 
for the r aids were corrected, the army would be handicapped j.n its fight 
against the VC. 
He stated that a firm U. S. stand for the removal of 
the Nhus would uni fy the army and permit it to act against them. ' lh/ 
These t wo direct and obviously reinforcing requests for U.S. support 
for military action aimed at Nhu ' s ouster marked the formal beginning 
of the U.S. i nvol vement in the protracted plotting against the Diem 
regi me. 
Two seni or civilians i n the government, Diem's chef de cabinet, 
Vo Van Hai, and Secretary of State, Nguyen Dinh Thuan, ",ere simul taneously 
telling U.S. contacts that Nhu's elimination from the government was vital 
and that t he U.S. should take a strong stand against him. 15/ 
On .August 24, Lodge cabled his appraisal of the situation t o 
'vashington, based on these conversations . 
IfNhu, If he reported, Ifprobably 
with full support of Diem, had a l arge hand in planning of action against 
Buddhists, if he did not fully master-mind it. His influence has also 
been significantl y increased." 16/ Nhu had simply taken advantage of the 
concern of certai n generals, possibly not fully informing t he r egular 
army of the planned action. 
Nonetheless, none of t he i mportant Sai gon 
area troop commanders (Don, Dinh, and Tung) .. !ere presently disaffected 
with the r egime . 
Furthermore, absence of clear-cut military leadership 
and troop strength in Saigon for a move against the Nhus would make U.S 
support of such an action a "shot in the dark." 17/ 
For the State Department, the problem of clarifyi ng the public 
record about the r ai ds and affixing r esponsibility for t hem had become 
acute by August 24. 
The press r eports emanating from Saigon had from 
the outset blamed Nhu for the raids, but VOA, with a l arge audience i n 
Vietnam, conti nued to r eport the official U.S. position that the army 
was culpable. 18/ The accumul ating evidence agai nst Nhu and the likeli-
hood of severedamage to army morale if VOA did not broadcast a clarifica -
tion seemed to call for r etractions . 
The second issue for Washington was Nhu . 
The generals had asked, 
in effect, for a green light to move against him, but Lodge had cautioned 
against it. Hilsman r eports t hat as he, Harriman, Forrestal, and Ball 
deliberated over the drafting of a reply on that Saturday morni ng, the 
stat ement of Thuan to Phillips t hat "under no circumstance should the 
14 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
United States acquiesce i n "hat the Nhus had done ,1I was given great 
weight . 19/ Admiral Felt telephoned ·Washington from CINCPAC to support 
a strong U. S. stand against the Nhus. 20/ The unanswered question, of 
course, was 1-lhether the Nhus could be removed without also sacrificing 
Diem, and if not, whether the resulting political i nstability- would not 
have an even more detrimental effect on the .Tar effort than maintaining 
Diem. 
The August 24 cable of instructions to Lodge resulting from these 
deliberations outlined an i mportant, and subsequently- controversial, new 
policy approach for the U.S. in South Vietnam. 
Its opening paragraphs 
crisply set forth the ne., American view: 
It is now clear that whether military proposed martial 
lavr or whether Nhu tricked them into it, Nhu took advantage 
of its imposition to smash pagodas 1-lith police and Tung ' s 
SpeCial Forces loyal to him, thus placing onus on military 
in eyes of .TOrld and Vietnamese people . 
Also clear that Nhu 
has maneuvered himself into commending position. 
US Government cannot tolerate situation in which power 
lies in Nhu 's hands. 
Diem must be giyen chance to rid himself 
of Nhu and his coterie and replace them with best military and 
political personalities availabl e. 
If, in spite of all your efforts , Diem remains obdurate 
and refuses, then we must face the possibility that Diem 
himself cannot be preserved. 21/ 
Lodge was instructed to tell the GVN the U.S. could not accept the 
actions against the Buddhists and that prompt dramatic steps to redress 
the situation must be taken. 
The key military leaders were to be 
privately informed that, 
• . • US would find it impossible to continue support 
GVN militarily- and economically unless above steps are taken 
i mmediately- .lhich we recognize requires removal of Nhus 
from the scene. 
We wish give Diem reasonable opportunity 
to remove Nhus, but if he remains obdurate, then we are 
prepared to accept the obvious implication that we Ca..l1 no 
longer support Diem. 
You may also tell appropriate military 
commanders we will give them direct support i n any interim 
period of breakdown central goverr~ent mechanism. 22/ 
Finally, the message recognized the need to publicly exonerate the army 
from the raids and asked Lodge to approve a VOA broadcast to that effect. 
Lodge was requested, as well, to survey urgently for alternative leader-
ship. 
Clearance of the draft message was complicated by the coincident 
week··end absence from Ivashington of most of the top level members of 
the Administration . 
The President was in Hyannis Port; Rusk was i n 
New York; and McNamara and l'-~cC one Here away on vacation. 
Both the 
15 
TOP SECRET - uensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'I' .. Sensitive 
President and the Secretary of State were reached, however, and approved 
the draft. 
Deputy Secretary of Defense RosvTell Gilpatric approved for 
Defense, and General Taylor for the JCS. 
Schlesinger, i n his account 
of the i ncident, suggests that the cable vas hasty and ill-considered, 
and that the President immediately began to back away from it. 23/ 
Lodge replied the follm·ring day endorsing the strong position but 
proposing to forego a futile approach to Diem and to state our position 
i nstead only to the generals, thus throvnng all our weight behind a 
coup. 
The cable stated: 
Believe that chances of Diem's meeting our demands are 
virtually nil. 
At the same time, by making them I.e give 
Nhu chance to forest all or block action by military. 
Risk, 
vTe believe, is not '-fOrth takj.ng, vTi th Nhu in control combat 
forces Saigon. 
Therefore, propose vTe go straight to Generals 
vn th our demands, without informing Diem. 
Vlould tell them 
we prepared have Diem without Nhus but it is in effect up 
to them whether to keep him. 24/ 
Hilsman asserts that the cable also reflected Lodge ' s view that since 
our disapproval of GVN action was ,'Tell known, it was not fitting for the 
U.S. to go to Diem, it was Diem who should come to us. 25/ 
In a separate CAS cable the same dey, Richardson, the CIA Chief of 
Station in Saigon, reported that at a meeting vn th Lodge and Harkins it 
had been agreed that Diem would not remove Nhu and that therefore, 
assuming State's cable of instructions on 24 August (Appendix) represented 
Washington's basic pollcy, the consensus was that contact should be 
immediately made with generals such as Hinh and Khanh to assess the 
degree of unity and determination of senior officers. Minh was considered 
the best possible interim leader, with Vice President Tho as the most 
attractive candidate for President among the civilians. 
The cable con-
cluded with the viev! that a junta would probably operate behind the 
scenes in the event of a successful coup, and that the U.S. should 
l eave the specific tactics of a coup up to the generals . 26/ There is 
a hiatus in the available cable traffic at this point, butHilsman 
indicates that Washington decided on Sunday, August 25, to defer a 
direct approach to Diem until more was knovm about the situation. 27/ 
In Lodge's reply, he had also apparently approved the proposed VOA 
broadcast to exonerate the army. 
Hilsman briefed the press on the basis 
of a previously approved draft statement on August 25. 
The statement 
expressed strong U.S. disapproval of the raids, which were attributed to 
Nhu. 
In reporting the story, the press speculated that such a strong 
statement probably indicated that measures such as aid suspension vJere 
being considered. 
VOA had been instructed to broadcast only the sub-
stances of the U.S. statement as provided in the press guidance and 
nothing more. 
The i nstructions somehm-r got mislaid, and on Iilonday 
morning, August 26, just several hours before Lodge was to present his 
credentials to Diem, VOA broadcast in full a UPI story which flatly 
16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
asserted that tithe US may sharply reduce its aid to Vietnam unl ess 
President Diem gets rid of secret police officials responsible for the 
attacks. tt 28/ Lodge was understandably upset , and sent a testy cable 
r hetorically inquiring whether he really vas i n charge of tactics as he 
had been given to understand. 29/ Rusk sent a personal cable of apology 
to Lodge, and VO."!" promptly broadcast a denial of U.S . intent to cut aid, 
but the initial dalnage had been done. 
The Vietnamese reaction to the attack on the pagodas during this 
time had been dramatic. 
In the United States, rifuIe . Nhu ' s father and 
mother, respectively the Vietnamese AJllbassador to the U.S. and the 
Vietnamese observer at the UN, had both resigned, making bitter public 
statements denouncing the raids. 
In South Vietnam, the Foreign r.~inister , 
Vo Van !-.~au , had resigned and shaved his head like a Buddhist monk in 
protest. 
On August 23, students at the faculties of medicine and 
pharmacy at the University of Saigon turned out to stage mass demonstra-
tions on behalf of the Buddhists. 
The GVN reacted i n the only ... ray it 
seemed to knm.r, ... ri th massive arrests. 
But the demonstrations continued, 
and when the uni versi ty ... ras closed, the protest vas t aken up by high 
school and junior high school students. 
These were dramatic evidences 
indeed of the degree of disaffection ... lith the regime, since most of the se 
students "Tere from the middle class families that formed the bureaucracy 
and the army leadership. 
Students in Vietnam had no substantial record 
of political activism as was the case with their counterparts i n other 
parts of ASia, like Korea. 
Furthermore, some of the Buddhist leadership 
had survived the raids and gone underground and ... rere soon passing out 
leaflets on the streets again . 
On the day of the raids, tvo monks had 
t aken refuge i n the USO:M building next door to Xa Loi pagoda. 
'llhe 
following day, three others, i ncl uding the militant young leader Tich 
Tri Quang, took r efuge in the U. S. Embassy, "'There they vrere warmly 
received by Lodge and remained until the successful November coup. 30/ 
2 . 
tli s -Coup 
Rumors of coup plotting had been a standard part of the Saigon scene 
under Diem from the very beginning. 
And there had been several attempts . 
I n 1957, an assassin fired at Diem at an up-country fair. 
In November 1960, 
he had narrovTly escaped being overthrmrD by a military coup by negotiating 
with the dissident officers until loyal reinforcements could be moved 
i nto Saigon to restore his control. 
And i n 1962, tvro disgruntled Air Force 
pilots had unsuccessfully bombed and strafed the Gia Long Pal ace . 
So, 
when rumors of coup plotting began to gain currency again i n the spring 
of 1963, they i-lere monitored by the U. S. intelligence conrrnuni ty, but not 
gi Yen extraordinary prominence or credence. 
By mid -summer, hovrever, with 
the Buddhist crisis in full bloom, more serious consideration was given 
to the grovTing nUJllber of reports identifying plotters and schemes . 31/ 
One plot, identified in l ate June, was l ed by Dr. Tran Kim Tuyen, Diem's 
Director of Political and Social Studies (national intelligence) . 32/ 
It i nvolved elements of the Civic Action r.1inistry, t he Information--
Ministry, the Secret Police, and some junior army officers. 
A separate 
plot i nvolving other elements of the army was reported, and on July 8 
17 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECFET - Sensitive 
General Don indicated to a CAS officer that there was support among 
all but a couple of generals for a coup. 33/ Nhu ' s July 11 meeting with 
the generals J hm.rever, seemed to disorient-their efforts temporarily . 
In a..11 August 14 memorandum, the CIA. acknowledged some military support 
for a coup, but doubted that anyone "Tould risk it unless a deterioration 
of the political situation threatened a Viet Cong Victory. 34/ The 
pagoda attack was j ust such a deterioration and it precipitated the 
generals ' first approach to the U.S. on August 23 about a coup. 
\-vi th State I s instructions of 24 August as guidance, Lodge met .Ti th 
Harkins, Truehart, Mecklin, and Richardson on the morning of August 26 
before presenting his credentials to Diem. 
They decided that the 
official U. S. hand should not shm.: - - i. e., Harkins should not tan: to 
the generals . It vas agreed that Lt. Colonel Cone in of the CIA viould con-
t act General Khiem, and I'1r. Spera (also of CIA) .lOuld contact General 
Khanh, II Corps commac'1der in Pleiku, conveying the following points to 
each : 
a. 
Solidification of further elaboration of action 
aspects of present thinking and planning. 
What should 
be done? 
b. 
We in agreement Nhus must go .. 
c. 
Question of retaining Diem or not up to them. 
d. 
Bonzes and other arrestees must be released 
i mmediately and five -point agreement of 16 June be fully 
carried out. 
e. 
We will provide direct support during any interim 
period of breakdo1-lD of central government mechanism. 
f. 
We cannot be of any help during initial action of 
assuming power of t he state. Entirely their ow action, 
win or lose. 
Don't expect to be bailed out. 
g. If Nhus do not go and i f Buddhi sts'situation is 
not redressed as indicated, we would find it i mpossible 
continue military and economic support. 
h. It is hoped bloodshed can be avoided or reduced to 
absol ute minimum. 
1. It is hoped that during process and after, develop-
ments conducted in such manner as to retain and i ncrease the 
necessary relations between Vietnamese a..l1d Americans .Thich 
will allOl'T for progress of country and successful prosecution 
of the .lar. 35/ 
Cone in met with Khiem on August 27, and after conveyi ng his message 
learned that Hinh vas t he l eader of the cabal, 'fhich i ncluded also 
Generals Kim, Khanh, Thieu, and Le . 
Don ,fas aware of the plot and 
approved, but .ras too exposed to participate. 
General Minh was u.nder 
surveillance , and had asked not to be contacted by the U. S. 
Khiem 
r ecognized the need to neutralize General Cao, t he IV Corps commander, 
General Dinh, the III Corps and Saigon Area commander, and Colonel 
Tung . 36/ A separate CAS report i ndicated that General Ki m had charge 
of plans for the provisional successor government which would i nclude 
both civilians and roili tary J with Minh as Presj.dent. 37/ 
18 
TOP SECRET - )ensitive 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Meanwhile, back in 't:ashington, by the time the NSC met on :Monday 
morning, August 26 , misgivings about lJ1,lDPOl;'\;:l.n 
a (; m1.p '- ' 
... pc lJol1(;y G;l'b-
lined in State ' s August 24 message -- had developed. 
Hilsman ' s account 
credits 1.1cNamara, Taylor, a..nd NcCone with second thought s. 38/ Hhatever 
the outcome of 1"londay ' s meeting, another was held the next day, after 
which Lodge ,vas cabled for more details about the coup plans, and an 
assessment of their chances of success. 39/ Reflecting the reservations 
in Vlashington, the message asked vThat effect delaying the coup would 
have. 
Replying the following day, Lodge gave a favorable assessment of 
coup prospects; expressed confidence in the generals 'Tho were to lead 
it, especially 1!linh, Khanh, and Kim; and argued, "that chances of 
success '-TOuld be diminished by delay. II 40/ A ca'91e from Harkins to 
Taylor on the S81l1e day is the first documentary indication of Harkins' 
reservations about supporting the coup attempt. 
Cryptically, Harkins 
indicated that he would offer his full support to the Ambassador in 
implementing State's instructions, but noted that, "Reference b. (CINCPAC 
250l~5 62 Aug 1963 ) advises me that reference a. (State 21~3) embodies 
CINCPi"C opinion an'd that my support had been volunteered. II 41/ He vTould 
have preferred one l ast attempt to persuade Diem to dispense-.dth Nhu. 
Furthermore, the line-up of forces did not indicate a clear-cut advantage 
for the coup plotters. 
Therefore, he stated, "In my opinion as things 
stand nOl" I don't believe there is sufficient reason for a crash approval 
on our part at this time." 42/ He also had concluded that the coup would 
not take place until we gave-the word. 
In a separate message, Richardson, 
however, described the situation as having "reached the point of no 
return. II 43/ Further, he concluded, "Unless the generals are neutralized 
before being able to launch their operation, vre believe they 'Ifill act and 
that they have good chance to vdn. II 44/ 
In Hashington, State and Defense 'I.Jere divided on the issue . 
Nolting, 
who was regularly attending the daily NSC meetings at the President's 
request, sided vli th the Pentagon in the view that prospects for t he coup 
weI"e not good, a..nd that another effort should be made with Diem. 
Hi lsman , 
Harrima..n, and Ball .rere convinced the U.S. had to get on with the coup, 
since Diem offered no prospect of complying the U.S. wishes. 45/ The 
discussions in the NSC, reportedly, were increasingly heated and te sty. l~6/ 
The division of opinion between Harkins and Lodge concerned the Presicer.t 
and upon receipt of their respective messages on August 28, he cabled 
each of them separately for their "independent judgment" about the 
prospects for a coup and their personal advice on the course the U.S. 
should pursue. 
The President was at pains to reiterate his great con-
fidence in both men, and to assure them that differences of opinion in 
Washington would not prevent the U.S. government from acting as a unit 
under his direction . 47/ In a separate message, State asked Lodge to 
indicate the latest point at which the operation could be suspended, 
and with what consequences j since U. S. prestige '\oTOuld be engaged in the 
venture, the message stated, once the coup .Tere under way, it had to 
succeed. 1~8/ Lodge .Tas also asked what actions the U. S. might take to 
promote the coup. 
19 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'I' - Sensitive 
~~.( ~~ 
t_,C 
~p 
On August 29, Colonel Conein and Hr . Spera met with Generals Khiem 
and Minh. 
Hinh bluntly said that the generals had to be cautious until 
they had clear evidence that the U. S. "lOuld not betray them to Nhu. 
They 
vTere um-Tilling to discuss their plans J and .. Then asked "That would con-
stitute a sign of U.S. support, replied that the U.S. should stop economic 
aid to the regime. 49/ In a subsequent separate contact w'i th Rufus 
Phillips, General Kim asked for verification that the Minh-Conein meeti ng 
had Lodge!s approval. 
After checking with Lodge, Phillips assured Kim 
who then asked for a meeting to discuss planning on t he next day. 
Lodge 
then authorized CAS to assist in t actical planning. 50/ 
Stressing the generals' reported l ack of confidence in U.S. support, 
Lodge's reply to Hashington asked Presidential permission for Harkins to 
shm. CAS messages to the generals to prove our commitment. If that failed, 
he reluctantly recommended suspension of economic aid as they requested. 
Ty-pical of the P.rnbassador ' s all-out support for the coup is the follm,ring 
summary he gave of the U.S. position: 
He are l aunched on a course from "Thich there is no 
respectabl e turning back: 
The overthrow of the Diem Govern-
ment. 
There is no turning back in part because US prestige is 
already publicly committed to this end in large measure and 
will become more so as f acts leak out. 
In a more fundamental 
sense, there is no turning back because there is no possibility, 
in my view, that the war can be won under a Diem administra-
tion, still less that Diem or a.'1y member of the family can 
govern the country in a way to gain the support of the people 
vho count, i. e., the educated class in and out of government 
service , civil and military -- not to mention the .American 
people. 51/ 
Harkins, on the other hand, felt that there was still time to make 
one last approach to Diem, vithout endangering the plotters, since their 
plans did not appear fully mature yet. 
Diem should be handed an ultimatum 
that the Nhus must go. 
Thi s, he felt, would strengthen the hand of the 
generals whose oppOSition, like ours, vras to the Nhus, not Diem. 
If Diem 
did not act, there would then be time to back a move by the generals. 52/ 
These vievTs were all revie-.red at the noon meeting of the NSC on 
August 29. 
At the meeting, I'.fcNamara backed Harkins' view in favor of a 
final approach to Diem, but the issue vras not decided. 53/ Rusk took 
up the question in a subsequent cable to Lodge, asking Lodge 's opinion 
about an approach to Diem, possibly by the generals at a time when they 
would be ready to act, in vThich they ,",ould insist on the removal of the 
Nhus, and threaten vri thdravral of U. S. support. 54/ A separate State 
cable to Lodge and Harkins authorized the latterto shov1 CAS cables to 
the generals to prove our support. 
Harkins vras instructed to insist on 
kno,dng the personnel involved in the coup, and the forces available, and 
to ask to review the detailed plans, vn thout, however, directly involving 
himself in the coup planning. 
Lodge vas authorized to suspend aid to 
Diem, Tlat a time and under conditions of your choice.!! '22/ 
20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In his response to Rusk ' s cable, Lodge stoutly opposed any further 
contact with Diem, even to present an ultimatulll. 
Agreeing .that removal 
of the 1'lms I{as the prime objective, Lodge argued, "This surely cannot 
be done by \vorking through Diem. 
In fact, Diem vill oppose it. He 
wishes he had more ]\Thus, not less . 
The best chance of doing it is by the 
generals taking over the government lock, stock and barrel. After this 
has been done, it can then be decided vhether to put Diem back in again 
or go on .. Ti t hout him." 56/ "That genuinely concerned Lodge at that point 
was the l ack of action by t he generals, but he 1-raS reluctant to use the 
aid suspension as a lever . 
Throughout this period, another CAS officer had been in contact 
with a Colonel Thao, an i nspector of strategic hamlets, vho was the 
leader of an indepeno.ent junior officer-civilian plot. 
On August 30, 
he told the CAS officer that he was in touch ,D.th the ' generals, and ",ould 
support any move they might make, but that for the moment the plans of 
his group had stopped because the risk of failure was too great . 57/ 
l<Tith Lodge's anxiety at the generals' failure to act increasi ng 
daily, General Harkins met ",ith General Khiem on August 31. 
He was told 
t hat ~,[inh had called off the coup for the time being because of the 
i nabili ty to achieve a favorable balance of forces in the Saigon area, 
and because of continuing anxiety among the generals about Richardson ' s 
close identification with the Nhus . 58/ Both Richardson and Lodge con-
f irmed the end of this coup attempt On the sa.rne day . 59/ 
Apparently 
unable to win over General Dinh, the Saigon III Corps-area commander, 
Minh had decided not to risk an indecisive, protracted bl ood bath "Ti th 
only a slim likelihood. of success . 
Three factors appear t o have been 
i mportant in Minh's decision to abort the coup: ( 1) the f ailure to win 
over Dinh, l eaving the coup forces at a tactical disadvantage i n the 
Saigon area; (2) continuing doubts about the firmness of the U. S. com-
mi tment to Diem ' s overthrow' 8...110. the related concern that the U. S. had 
wi ttingly or unwittingly tipped off Nhu to the plot ; and (3) uncertainty 
about the cohesion of the coup group and the firmness of pl ans . 
Lodge 
concl uded somewhat bitterl y, " • • • there i s neither the .Til l nor the 
organization among the generals to accomplish anything ." 60/ He did not, 
however, rule out a future attempt. 
--
3. 
T,oward a New . Policy 
Having at long l ast decided to seek 8...11 alternative t o the Diem 
r egime by sanctioning a coup, only to have t he attempt f ail, the U. S. 
f ound itself at t·he end of August 1963 vTi thout a policy and with most 
of i ts bridges burned . 
In both Saigon and Hashington, t he reappraisal 
and t he search for alternatives began ane"T. 
In the cabl e acknm-rledging 
t he demise of the coup plot on August 31, Lodge suggested t hat : 
Perhaps an arrangement could be worked out ,{hereby 
the f ollowing could be made to happen : 
Had8Jlle Nhu t o 
l eave the country, Hr . Nhu ' s funct i ons to be limited 
21 
TOP SECR~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
entirel y to strategic hamlets; the office of Prime 
Minister to be created and liir. Thuan to become Prime 
Minister; Archbishop Thuc to leave the country. 
In 
addition, the students and Buddhists 'vould be liberated; 
Decree La,., 10 "Tould be repealed; the pagodas vrould be 
repaired and conciliatory gestures vTOuld be made. 
All 
of this, if agreed to, might be announced by President 
in Washington. 61/ 
These suggestions bec2JIle the basis of discussion of a t'vrhere do vre go 
from here
ll NSC meeting on the same day. 
In the absence of the President, Secretary Rusk chaired the meeting 
at the State Department, and called for consideration of the Lodge 
proposals, but said he felt it vms unrealistic to start off by asserting 
that Nhu must go. 62/ Secretar'J McNamara urged that "re lIestablish 
quickly and firmly ();~r line of communication behreen Lodge, Harkins and 
the GVN . II 
He pointed out that lIat the moment our channels of communica -
tion are essentially broken tl and that ttthey should be reinstituted at 
all costs. II 63/ These considerations .rere soon submerged, ho"rever, in 
a broader discussion of the negative impact of the regime ts actions on 
the vrar effort . 
Hilsmal1, supported by State 1 s Kattenburg of the Vietnam 
1-lorking Group, argued that we should not continue our support of a Nhu-
dominated regime because i ts repressive policies 1-TOuld eventually have 
a disastrous effect on the war, even if the statistics did not yet reveal 
their negative impact. 64/ Hilsman and Kattenburg pointed to the grm.ring 
disaffection and restiveness of middle level bureaucrats and military 
officers as a factor which vTOuld steadily erode the military effort . 65/ 
Unconvinced, both Secretary Ecl'l'amara and General Taylor asked for evidence 
of this development. 
Kattenburg offered his estimate that I-re would be thro.m out of the 
country i n six months if the regime remained in pOi-rer and that the 
question the meeting should be considering was lithe decision to get out 
honorably .1I 66/ Taylor and Nolting immedi ately took exception to these 
views and Secretary Rusk remarked that they ,-rere IIlargely speculative. II 67/ 
He continued, IIthat it vTOuld be far better for us to start on the firm 
basis of two things -- that we will not pullout of Vietnam until the war 
is won, and that vIe will not r un a coup. II 68/ Secretary McNamara and 
Vice President Johnson supported Rusk 1 s views, the Vice President saying 
he had never really seen an alternative to Diem. 
The meeting ended incon-
clusively; the only decision taken was to ask for Lodgers advice. 
As the only documented meeting during this period of major policy 
deliberation, the August 31 meeting is significant for the vie,vpoints 
it reveals. 
Rambling inability to focus the problem, indeed to reach 
common agreement on the nature of the pro'Qlem, reflects disorientation 
in the aftermath of the initial failure . 
More importantly, ho.rever, the 
meeting is the first recorded occasion in which someone follo.red to its 
logical conclusion the negative analysis of the situation -- i.e., that 
the var could not be won vrith the Diem regime , yet its removal would 
22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
l eave such political i nstability as to foreclose success in the war: 
for the first time, it was recognized that the U.S . should be consider-
i ng methods of honorably disengaging itself from an irretrievable situa-
tion. 
The other alternative, not fully appreciated until the year 
following, ",as a much greater U.S. involvement i n and assumption of 
r esponsibility for the ltTar . 
At this point, hOI-lever, t he negative 
analysis of the impact of the political situation on the war effort was 
not shared by M.clTamara, Taylor, Krulak, nor seemingly by Rusk . 
But discussions "Tere overtaken by events. 
On the following Monday, 
September 2, the PreSident, appearing on the initial broadcast of the 
CBS Evening HeloTS, was intervievTed by \\7al ter Cronkite: 
1·1,r. Cronkite. 
Hr. Pre sident, the onl y hot war .Te ' ve got 
r unning at the moment is of course the one in Viet .-~Tam , and 
we have our difficul ties here, quite obviously. 
President Kennedy. 
I don't think t hat ul1less a, greater 
effort is made by the Government to win popular support that 
the war can be won out there. 
I n the final 8..'r1alysi s , it is 
their war . 
They are the ones i{ho have to "Tin it or lose it. 
lie can hel p them, we can give them equipment, we can send 
our men out there as advisers, but t hey have to .Tin it --
the people of Viet-Nam -- against the Communists. 
1tIe are 
prepared to continue to assist t hem, but I don't think 
that t he "Tar can be ifon unless the people support the 
effor t, and, i n my opinion, i n t he l ast hro months the 
Government has gotten out of touch with the people. 
The repressions against the Buddhists, we felt, 
were very umTise. 
NOIf all we can do is to make it very 
clear t hat we don't think this i s the "lay to win. It is 
my hope. t hat this will become i ncreasingl y obvious to 
the Government, t hat they will take steps to try to 
bring back popular support for t his very essential struggle. 
Mr. Cronkite . 
Do you think this Government has time 
to regain the support of the people? 
President Kennedy . 
I do, 
vIi th changes in policy and 
perhaps with personnel, I think it can , If it doesn't 
make those changes, I "rould t hink that the chances of 
winning it would not be very good, 69/ 
. 
Confront ed by the necessity of public comment, the President had spoken 
boldly and forthrightly. 
The President's call for changes of policy and 
personnel patently conveyed the message that the Buddhist repres sions 
must end, and the Nhus must go. 
Later i n the s ame interview, ho.Tever, 
the President had said, 
II •• , I don't agree "Tith t hose who say we 
should withdraw. 
That would be a great mistake, II 19./ As Hilsman sum-
marized it l ater, 
23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
'He had embarked on a policy that avoi ded t he 
extremes both of wi thdra"ring from Vietnam or of actually 
taking part in direct action to change t he Government . 
The policy was one of trying to discriminate by con-
tinuing to support those Vietnamese "rho were struggling 
against the Communists but maintai ning the t ension of 
our disapproval of Diem's and Nhu ' s repressive policies . Jl/ 
It vas, in effect, t he policy Lodge had proposed. 
Meanwhile i n Saigon, Lodge had gone ahead with his proposals. 
He conti nued to avoid any official contact with Diem, but on September 2 
he had his second meeting vri th Nhu (the first on August 27 was an i ncon-
clusi ve statement of positions on each side 72/) in company "rith the 
Italian Alllbas sador and the Papal Delegate. 
Nhu, perhaps encouraged by 
a collateral i ntercession of the l<'rench Ambassador, announced he i ntended 
to resign from the government for good and r eti re to Dalat. 73/ ' A GVN 
announcement would state t hat the progress of the program against the 
Viet Cong permitted hi s departure. 
t·~e . Nhu was to l eave Vietnam for 
a trip to Yugoslavia, Italy, and possi bly the U.S. 
The Papal Del egate 
"TOuld arrange for Archbi shop Thuc to leave the country. 
Some measures 
to ease Buddhist tensions would be taken and, as a public relations 
gesture, a prime minister would be appointed. 
These "rere all proposal s 
which Lodge had i nitially advanced. 
But as the days passed, nothing 
happened and Lodge gre,., i mpatient. Contributing to his concern ,.,ere 
the frequent and often contradictory rumors that Nhu was secretly 
dealing with Hanoi and/ or the VC through the French and the Polish 
Ambassadors, both of whose governments favored a neutralist solution 
betw'een North and South Vietnam. 74/ 
For the remai nder of the week, the Italian Ambassador and the 
Papal Delegate urged IJhu to act on his promises to Lodge . 
On Friday, 
September 6, after they had stressed the urgency for action created by 
Senator Church's r umored aid-suspension resolution, Nhu vent into a 
tirade and said he would not consider l eaving the country. 
He did, 
however, say he would !!formally!! resign . 75/ On the follovring day, the 
Papal Delegate, who had condemned Archbishop Thuc's activity to the 
Vatican and received the Pope 's support, got Thuc out of the country. 76/ 
Mme. I-Ihu left the countI"J for Europe on September 9. 
The arrests of -
students by the r egime, hovrever, continued and stories of torture and 
atrocities began to circulate. 
In 'Washington, the NSC met on September 6 and renewed the discussion 
of reopening !!tough negotiations!! with Diem. 77/ Lodge, of course, 
opposed this while continuing his dialogue with Nhu. 
But others at the 
meeting (presumably including IvIcNamara on the basis of his views at the 
August 31 meeting) urged that Lodge be instructed to make another 
approach to Diem. 
Lodge was accordingly i nstructed to clarify for Diem 
the U. S. position a.nd explain the difficult position his policy placed 
us in ,-rith respect to U. S. and world opinion. 78/ 
24 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Perhaps the most important discussion at the meeting was that 
engendered by Robert Kennedy over the fundamental purpose of the U.S. 
involvement. 
According to Hilsman, Robert Kennedy said: 
As he understood it we were there to help the people 
resisting a Commw1ist take-over. 
The first question was 
vlhether a Communist take-over could be successfully resisted 
with any government. If it could not, now was the time to 
get out of Vietnam entirely, rather than waiting. If the 
answer was that it could, but not with a Diem-Nhu govermnent 
as it 'fas nOlv constituted, vle owed it to the people resisting 
Communism in Vj.etnam to give Lodge enough sanctions to bring 
changes that would permit successful resistance. 
But the 
basic question of whether a Communist take-over could be 
successfully resisted 'Ti th any government had not been 
answered, and he vas not sure that anyone had enough informa-
tion to answer it. 12/ 
Kennedy! s trenchant analysis, hOI-rever, did not generate a searching 
reappraisal of U.S. policy. It Md stimulate further efforts to get 
more infonna.tion on the situation. 
HcNamara proposed sending General 
Krulak on an immeMate fact-finding trip. It 'vas agreed that a senior 
Foreign Service Officer with Vietnam experience, Joseph Mendenhall, 
would accompany him, and that they .TOuld bring John Ilecklin, the USIS 
director, and Rufus Phillips , the director of rural programs for USOI>1, 
back I-Tith them to report. 80! Krulak and Hendenhall left later that 
day. 
State, for its part,-Sent Saigon a long comprehensive cable of 
questions on Vietnamese attitudes at all levels of society. 81/ 
The purpose of the Krulak-rt::endenhall mission was to assess, i n 
Krulak!s VTords, 
If the effect of recent events upon the attitudes of the 
Vietnamese in general, and upon the war effort against the Viet Cong.1f 82/ 
In a vrhirlwind four-day trip, the two men visited throughout Vietnam and 
returned to Washington to report . 
Krul ak .lent to ten different locations 
in all four corps areas and spoke with the }'unbassador, General Harkins 
and his staff, 87 U.S. adVisors, and 22 Vietnamese officers. 83/ 
Mendenhall vent to Saigon, Hue, Da Nang, and several other provincial 
cities and talked primarily to old Vietnamese friends. 
Not surprisingly, 
their estimates of the situation were almost completely opposite. 
The NSC convened on the morning of September 10, immediately after 
their return, to hear their reports. 
Krulak gave a very optimistic 
appraisal of the progress of the war and discounted the effect of the 
political crisis on the army. 
The following, in his OIm words, .Tere 
his general conclusions : 
The shooting war is still going ahead at an impressive 
pace. It has been affected adversely by the political 
crisis, but the impact is not great. 
There is a lot of war left to fight, particularly in 
the Delta, .There the Viet Cong remain strong. 
25 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Vietnamese officers of all r anks are well aware of the 
Buddhist issue . 
Most have viewed it in detachment and have not 
permitted religious differences significantly to affect their 
internal military relationship. 
Vietnamese military commanders, at the variQus echelons, 
are obedient and could be expected to execute any order 
they view as law·ful. 
The U.S. / Vietnamese military relationship has not been 
damaged by the political crisis, in any significant degree. 
There is some dissatisfaction, among Vietnamese officers, 
",ith the na,tional administration. It is focused far more on JlTgo 
Dinh Nhu than on President Diem. 
Nhu ' s departure would be 
hailed, but fev officers would extend their necks to bring it 
about. 
Excluding the very serious political and military factors 
external to Vietnam, the Viet Cong ",ar "'ill be ,von if the 
current U.S. military and sociological programs are pursued, 
irrespective of the grave defects in .the ruling regime. 
Improvements in the quality of the Vietnamese Govern-
ment are not going to be brought about by leverage applied 
through the military. 
They do not have much, and vTill 
probably not use vlhat they have. 81+/ 
This sanguine vievl of the situation was forcefully disputed by J',Iendenhall. 
He argued that the disaffection mth the regime had reached the point 
vThere a breakdown of civil government was threatened, and the possibility 
of a religious civil war could not be excluded. 
The war could not be 
won mth the present regime, he concluded . 85/ The polar opposition of 
these two reports prompted Kennedy 's now f aiiiOus query, "You two did 
visit the same country, didn't you?" 86/ 
The critical failure of both reports was to understa.TJ.d the f unda-
mental political role that the army was coming to play in Vietnam.. It 
was the only potential force with sufficient power to constitute an 
alternative to Diem. 
Diem and Nhu fully understood this fact, and had 
coped l"i th it by usurping the prerogative of senior officer promotion, 
and basing those promotions on loyalty to the palace. 
This had SOvTD deep 
seeds of distrust among the senior military men, and fragmented their 
potential power. 
Krulak failed to see that once the internal political 
situation deteriorated to the point where massive disaffection mth the 
regime threatened a communist victory, the generals would unite and 
plunge into politics out of common necessity. 
But more importantly) 
neither Krulak nor 1·1endenhall seemed to anticipate that, if the army 
achieved power, the divisive effect of Diem's preferential promotion 
policies would surface in an internal army pOl·rer struggle. 
Nor did 
they fully understand the negative effect on the war effort this pre-
occupation .Ti th politics among the generals .lOuld have. 
26 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR~T - Sensitive 
Nolting took issue with l':endenhall' s appraisal, noting that 
Mendenhall had been pessimistic abot;.~ prospects in Vietna'TI for several 
years. 
But John Mecklin, the USIS director, corroborated Nendenhall's 
view, and pushed it even further, sa:,-ing that the U. S. should apply 
. direct pressure, such as suspension of non-military aid, to bring about 
a change of government. 
In Mecklin' s .lords: 
This would unavoidably be ds...'1gerous. 
There was no way 
to be sU.re hoY! events "TOuld develop . It was possible, for 
example, that the Vietnamese fOY'ces mJght fragment into 
"Tarring factions, or that t he new government rTOuld be so 
incompetent fu'1d/or unstable that the effort against the 
Viet Cong would collapse. 
The US should t herefore resolve 
no", to i ntroduce American combat forces if necessary to 
present a Communist triumph midst the debris of the Diem 
regime . 87/ 
-
Mecklin appreciated the potential for i nstability inherent in any army 
successor regime that Krulak and l=end.enhall had not seen. 
But he, 
nevertheless, concluded that ve should proceed to bring about a change 
of government, accept the consequences, and contemplate the introduction 
of U.S. combat troops to stave off a Viet Cong victory. 
The meeting went on to hear Rufus Phillips ' dour report on the 
situation in the Delta, and his doubts about the validity of Krulak's 
optimistic outlook on the military situation. 88/ Phillips argued that 
this was primarily a political contest for theallegiance of people, not 
a military war, and that the Diem r egi me was losing it. 
The Strategic 
Hamlet Program was a shambles in the field, especially in the Delta. 
The meeting ended on this note and no decisions were made. 
One course of action being given increasing consideration in these 
meetings, as well as in Saigon and on Capitol Hill, was a suspension of 
non-mili tary aid to Diem. 
Jifter the erroneous VOA announcement of aid 
suspension on August 26, Lodge had been authorized on August 29, as 
already noted, to suspend aid at his discretion if it would facilitate 
the coup. 
Lodge had been reluctant to do so. 
The question had been 
raised again in a joint State/ .AJD cable to Lodge on September 3 ",hich 
listed the items currently up for a:9proval or renewal. 89/ Lodge 1-TaS 
informed that all approval for non-military aid would be-temporarily 
held up but that no suspension 1.,as to be announced, since such a policy 
decision was still pending. 
Lodge took advantage of this by having the 
mission, and especially USOM, reply to all GVN inquiries about the 
status of the aid renevTals or approvals that President Diem would have 
to taU:. to IJodge about it. Meamrhile, the U. S. Senate began to put 
pressure on the Administration to do something about Diem. 
Hilsman ,,,as 
badgered by the Senate Subcommittee on the Far East, and there were 
threats of f urther cuts in the .UD bill if something vasn ' t done. 
Senator Church informed the .Administration he intended to introduce soon 
a resolution condemning Diem's repressions against the Buddhists and 
calling for an end of aid to South Vietnam unless they "Tere aba..l1doned. 
27 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
He agreed to delay its introduction temporarily so as not to embarrass 
the Administration. 22/ 
The idea of a selective aid suspension to goad Diem into action was 
actively discussed at State during the Krulak-Mendenhall mission, and 
later John Hecklin had specifically suggested it to the NSC . 91/ On 
September 8, AID Director David Bell warned in a TV interview-that the 
Congress might cut aid to South Vietnam if the Diem government did not 
change its policies. 92/ On r.:onday, September 9, ho,·rever, the President, 
in a TV i nterview for the nevI Huntley-Brinkley Nei-TS, said, "I don't 
think Ire think that (a reduction of U. S. aid to South Vietnam) vlould be 
helpful at this time." 93/ On September 11, the day after the President 
received the Krulak-I,lendenhall reports, Lodge reversed his previous 
position, and in a long cable proposed that o.etailed consideration be 
given to frays in vhich non -military aid suspension might be used as a 
sanction to topple the government. 94/ He had concluded we could not 
get satisf'action from Diem, and hadto face up to the unpleasant task 
of forCing events. 
This view vlaS reinforced the next day in a long series 
of ca..bles replying to State 's September 7 request for a comprehensive 
evaluation of South Vietnamese attitudes. 95/ 
Lodge's proposal, and a proposal by Hilsman for a combined set of 
public and private measures to bring pressure on Diem, formed the basis 
of a ~-lhi te House meeting on September 11. 96/ On the follmving day, 
Senator Church was given the green light and introduced his resolution. 
On September 14, Lodge was informed that approval of the $18.5 million 
remainder of the commercial import program (the principal piastre support, 
anti-inflation aid device) was deferred until basic U.S. policy decisions 
had been made . 97/ The decision on aid suspension was nov absorbed i nto 
the broader consideration of a set of coordinated measures to put pressure 
on the GVN. 
Throughout September, the division of oplnlon lvithin the U.S. 
mission in Saigon had grown sharper and sharper. 
Harkins, Richardson, 
and to a lesser extent Brent (Director of usmn, did not believe that 
the Diem government's bungling of the Buddhist crisis and loss of popular 
support were threatening the war effort, or that the crisis vlaS as serious 
as Lodge, Mecklin, Mendenhall et a1. 
portrayed it. In any case, the 
'-- , 
si tuation was not so irretrievable as to require aU. S. abandonment of 
Diem in a risky venture at coup-making tm-rards an unknown alternative. 98/ 
The opposite viev Vlas held by Lodge, Truehart, Hecklin, Phillips, and the 
majority of the junior officers in the mission. 
By mid-September, the 
debate had reached a shrill and acrimonious level, as the follmving 
excerpt from a Harkins' cable to Taylor indicates: 
As everyone else seems to be talking, writing and 
confUSing the issue here in Vietnam, it behooves me to also 
get into the act. 
From most of the reports and articles 
I read, one vTOuld say Vietnam and our programs here are 
falling apart at the seams. 
Hell,' I just thoroughly 
disagree. 99/ 
28 
TOP SECRET - 'Sensitive 
\ 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The situation was of such concern that CIA dispatched a special officer 
to reach aD independent evaluation, 
His conclusion .ras that .,e had 
hastily expended our capability to overthrm{ the regime, that an aid 
suspension "\-,ould not guarantee a constructive result, and that to prevent 
further political fragmentation we should adopt a "business as usual" 
policy to buy time. 100/ P.Jllidst all this internal U. S. dissension, the 
GVN announced on September 14 that martial 1m·, would end on September 
16 and that National Assembly elections would be held September 27. 101/ 
In Hashington, the NSC convened again September 17 to consider hro 
alternative proposals for dealing with Diem prepared by Hilsman. 
The 
first , ,·,hich Hilsman and others at State favored, was the "pressures 
and persuasion track,1I and involved an escalatory ladder of measures 
both public and private, including selective aid suspension, to coerce 
Diem into getting rid of Nhu and taking steps to restore the political 
situation. 102/ The alternative proposal the IIreconciliation vith a 
-
, 
rehabilitated GVN track,!! involved a public posture of acquiescence in 
recent GVN actions, recognition that Diem and Nhu were inseparable, 
and a decision to salvage as much as possible from a bad situation. 
This, of course, would have involved a reopening of the dialogue with 
Diem, to which Lodge was opposed. 
Both proposals assumed that for the 
moment a coup was out of the question. 
There are no available records of what transpired in the meeting, 
but two deCisions were clearly made. 
The first was, in effect, to adopt 
Hilsman's llpressures and persuasion" proposal. 
The guidance cable to 
Lodge after the meeting, however, came from the White House. It stated 
that, 
We see no good opportunity for action to remove present 
government in i mmediate future; therefore, as your most 
recent message suggests, we must, for t he present, apply such 
pressures as are available to secure whatever modest improve-
ments on the scene may be possible .•• Such a course, more-
over, is consistent .lith more drastic effort as and when means 
became available. 103/ 
Lodge .las to press for a reduction of Nhu ' s authority and his departure 
from Saigon, at least temporarily. 
The cable included a long list of 
other measures for the GVN to take to redress the political situation and 
gave Lodge complete control over . the aid program to enhance his bargaining 
position. 
This authorization specifically includes aid actions 
currently held in abeyance and you are authorized to set 
those in train or hold them up further in your discretion. 
l¥"e leave entirely in your hands decisions on the degree of 
privacy or publicity you "l-lish to give to this process. 104/ 
There is no evidence on the degree of consensus of the principals in 
this decision. 
29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
'l'OP SE C ~(EI - Sensitive 
Lodge replied to the ne", policy guidance on September 19 in a 
generally negative vein. 105/ 
The pro})osals for specific actions by 
the GVn had all been previously suggested to Diem without any results, 
and Lodge "TaS not optimistic about tieir adoption now. 
He specifically 
felt that he should not be required to make a futile overture to Diem. 
The PJ'abassador! s aloofness was begir_ning to cause official concern at 
the palace, and he felt he should press vie'ws on the ~~go family only 'when 
they initiated the contact. 
He did f"ot think. a public relations effort 
was likely to have any effect on the regime, whose appreciation of 
questions of public support was virtually nil. 'Hithholding aid was 
another delicate matter that did not offer great prospects of success. 
Lodge was particuarly concerned that such action "TQuld impede the "rar 
effort or damage the economy, but hE..-re no re8.1 effect on the regime. 
I~ o doubt recalling the generals! pre-fious request for an aid suspension 
as a sign of U.S. support, Loige expressed his view that any suspension 
of aid should be timed to coincide -ith another coup attempt and should 
be used to facilitate it. 
He ',:as troubled by the opinion expressed by 
both General Minh and Secretary ThuE..n privately within the previous hw 
days that the \Var vTaS going very baily and the VC were winning . 
In 
general, he felt that a patient "let them come to me" tactic vTaS more 
likely to have results, unless a real coup possibility emerged, which 
he felt we should back. 
4. 
The l1cNaro.ara-Taylor l"iission 
The second decision to come out of the September 17 NBC meeting was 
to adopt a suggestion of Secretary Lcl~ amara for another fact-finding 
mission, this time by himself and Ger:.eral Taylor, Chairman of the JCS. 106/ 
Lodge reacted immediately to the proposed HcNamara-Taylor mission, 
pointing out to the President that such a visit vlOuld require a call on 
Diem that would be construed by the regime as a return to business as 
usual. 107/ 
Since he had been consciously pursuing a policy of official 
aloofnesS; he wondered ,,[hether such a high level visit was desirable. 
Furthermore, it coincided with the proposed 1;ational Assembly elections 
on September 27, a.l1d could not but be construed as an indication of the 
lack of importance I'le attached to ttem. 
But the President was insistent, 
and Lodge acquiesced, suggesting that the public announcement state that 
Lodge had requested the visit . 108/ 
After an exchange of alternative 
phraseology, it vms agreed that the release would say that the President 
had decided to send the mission after consultation vlith Lodge. 
It was so 
announced on September 21 . 109/ 
The President ! s instructions to Ncl': amara described the purpose of 
the mission in the following terms: 
I am asking you to go because of my desire to have the 
best possible on-the-spot appra.isal of the military and 
parrunilitary effort to defeat the Viet Cong .... The events 
in South Vietnam since i·lay have nOVi raised serious questions 
. 30 
TOP SECRLT - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECBEr - Sensitive 
both about the present prospects for success against the Viet 
Cong and still more about the future effectiveness of this 
effort unless there can be important political improvement in 
the country. 
It is in this context that I now need your 
appraisal of the situation. 
If the prognosis in your judgment 
is not hopeful., I would like your vie1trs on what action must be 
taken by the South Vietnamese Government and what steps our 
Govermnent should take to lead the Vietnamese to that action . 
• . . I will also expe ct you to examine ,'lith Ambas sador Lodge 
1trays and means of fashioning all forms of our assistance to 
South Vietnam so that it will support our foreign policy ob-
jectives more precisely. 110/ 
The purpose, thus, IvaS fourfold: (1) appraise the war effort; ( 2) assess 
the impact on that effort of recent political developments; (3) recommend 
a course of action for the GVN and for the U.S.; and (21-) examine "lith 
Lodge ways of tailoring our aid to achieve our foreign policy objectives . 
In a statement to the press at Andre1tTs Air Force Base just before leaving. 
for Vietnam on September 23, Secretary ncl{amara said that t he purpose 
of t he trip ,vas, " . .. to determine whether that military effort bas been 
adversely affected by the unrest of the past several 1treeks . 11 111/ 
Both Schlesinger and Hilsman , however, contend that Kennedy sent 
McNamara and Taylor to Vietnam to convince them of the negative effect 
on the war effort that the protracted political crisis 'Has having, and 
of the necessity of applying sanctions to the Diem regime to bring about 
change . 
According to this argmaent, the President felt he could not 
afford a major policy rift in the Administration over applying sa,nctions, 
e specially the opposition of the powerful JCS, and concluded that only 
Mc:~amara, if convinced, could bring the military along. 112/ 
Vlhatever the exact purpose of the trip, the party left Hashington 
on September 23 and returned ten days later, on October 2, after an 
exhausting trip and a comprehensive revieI'J of the situation . 
The divergent vielvs of the members of the U. S. mission about the 
r elative progress .of the ,'Tar , and the effect on it of the political 
crisis, were exposed immediately i n the opening session that Mc~~amara 
and Taylor held in Saigon with the country team on September 25. 
General 
Harkins and the .rill.CV staff generally presented a favorable picture of 
the war , emphas izing the progress of the strategic hamlet program, and 
the generally improved A~VN position , in spite of recent rises in VC 
i nitiated i ncidents and declines in ARVN operations related to the po-
litical turmoil. 113/ 
Mcnamara and Taylor prodded the briefers "llTith 
questions trying to get comparative i ndicators of the situation over the 
previous tl,oTO years. 
NIcl\~amara in particular pressed for details about 
the Delta. 
Lodge I sand Eecklin I s readi ng OI~ recent events, and their 
estimate of war progress, differed sharply from that of General Harki ns . 
31 
TOP SECP~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Lodge stressed the more political and intangible aspects of the conflict 
and cast doubt on the lIhardness" of the statistical data from :M.4CV . 
With the Mission 's division of opinion exposed and the is sues joined., 
McNamara l eft to tour the country. 
His subsequent itinerary took him throughout the country i nter-
vieWing Americans and Vietnamese both at headquarters, and in the field. 
In Saigon, in the l ast few days of t he visit, he \·:as given extensive 
briefings by the civilian side of the Mission and, since he stayed ;.rith 
Lodge , had ample opportunity for discussions vTith the .L\mbassador . 
On September 29, MCl,Tamara, Taylor, Harkins, and Lodge called on Diem, 
after having previously decided against delivery of a stiff letter from 
Kennedy . 114/ 
After a two-hour monologue by Diem, l'1cNamara vIas finally 
able to stress the U. S. concern that Dolitical unrest ' was undermining 
t he war effort. 115/ 
He stressed th~ problem that repressions vlere 
creating for President Kennedy because of aroused public opinion . 
But 
he did not ask for the removal of the Hhus, a matter W"tshington had left 
to his and Lodge ' s discretion. 
All this seems to have ' had littl e impact 
on Diem, hovrever . 
Diem had asked Taylor for his appraisal of the I\rar , 
and -vri th the approval of 1-1cNamara, a l ong letter from Taylor vTaS delivered 
to Diem on October 2. 
The l etter pointedly outlined the major military 
problems in the Delta, vTarned of the danger to the war effort of the 
political criSis, and listed many of the specific steps needed to improve 
t he military effort that subsequentl y appeared i n the r eport to the 
President. 
The l etter summed up with a terse, tough statement of the 
U. S. view: 
In closing, Nr . President , may I give you my most important 
over-all impression? 
Up to nm'l, the battle against the Viet 
Cong has seemed endless; no one has been willing to set a date 
for its successful conclusion. 
After talking to scores of 
officers, Vietnamese and American, I am convinced that the 
Viet Cong i nsurgency i n the north and center can be r educed to 
litt l e more than sporadic incidents by t he end of 1964. 
The 
Delta will take longer but should be completed by the end of 
1965 . 
But for t hese predictions to be valid, certain conditions 
must be met . 
Your Government should be prepared to energize 
all agencies, military and civil, to a hi gher output of activity 
than up to now . 
Ineffective commanders and province officials 
must be repl aced as soon as i dentified. 
Fi nally, t here should 
be a r estoration of domestic tranquility on the home front if 
political tensions are to be allayed and external critici sm is 
to abate. 
Condi tions are needed for the creation of an atmos"' 
phere conducive to an effective campaign directed at the objec-
tive , vital to both of us, of defeating the Viet Cong and of 
restoring peace to your community. 116/ 
32 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
On September 30, their last day in Vietnam, HcF81nara and Taylor, together 
with Lodge , met with Vice President Tho. 
Tho s aid that the U. S., after 
T8.ylor's report in 1961, had responded to the Vietnam situation promptly 
. and efficiently, but that recently lye ha,d failed to use our strength and 
i nfluence intelligently to prevent the current political deterioration. 117/ 
But he had no methods to suggest . 
Later he sharply questioned the succesS-
of the Strategic Haml et Program, and said that i ncreased Viet Cong strength 
had to be attributed to vlidespread peasant disaffection with the government. 
'I'hese views, from the man most often mentioned in U. S. circles as an al-
ternative to Diem, coming at the end of the visit as they did, must have 
had an important influence on ltlcl'!amara' s conclusions. 
Later that day the 
party left Vietnron to return home. 
During the briefings for Nciiamara, Lodge had rai'sed again his doubts 
about the efficacy of aid suspension as a l ever against Diem, but had also 
expressed his concern that the foreign aid bill vTould be penalized in 
Congress for Diem ' s repressions. 118/ 
Lodge reiterated in his cables to 
Washington during the visit his belief that an aid suspension could 
boomerang and alienate the populat ion as well as the r egime. 119/ 
AVIare ; 
no doubt, that an aid suspension vIaS a potential recommendation of the 
mission, Brent went on r ecord against it, too. 120/ 
Both views were 
important because McFamara and Taylor had been specifically charged by 
the President with examining VIaYs to make our aid serve our foreign policy 
goals, and their briefing papers included a program-by-program cons i dera-
tion of the impact of aid suspension prepared by AID -'IIashington . 12.1/ 
After a one-day stop i n Honolulu to prepare their report , l:lci'Tamara 
and Taylor arrived back in Ho.shi ngton on October 2 and promptly met 1-rith 
the President and the l~SC . 
Their report concluded that the l1mili tary 
campaign has made great progress and conti nues to progress ." 122/ 
But 
it warned that the serious pol itical tensions in Saigon and the increas-
ing unpopularity of Diem and Ehu could abet the then limited r estiveness 
of some ARVE officers and erode the favorabl e military trends. 
They 
reported no evi dence of a successful coup in the making, and felt that 
U. S. pressure woul d probably only further harden the regime's attitudes . 
Eevertheless, "unless such pressures are exerted, they (Diem-Nhu) are 
almost certain to continue past patterns of behavior . 11 123/ 
The report's military r ecommendations were that General Harkins should 
review the war effort with Diem with a view tOlmrd i ts successful conclu-
sion i n I, II, and III Corps by the end of 1964 and in the Delta by the 
end of 1965 . 
This would necessitate: ( a ) a shift in military emphasis and 
strength to the Delta; (b) an i ncreased tempo of military activity 
throughout the country; (c) an emphasis on II c l ear and hold operations"; 
(d) a consolidation of the strategic Hamlet Program with the emphasis on 
security; and (e) the fleshing out of combat units and better training 
,and arms for the hamlet militia. It vras further proposed that an aru1ounce-
ment be made of the planned withdrawal of 1,000 U. S. troops by the end of 
33 
TOP SECRE'l.' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1963 in connection with a progrB1ll to train Vietnamese to replace Americans 
in all essential functions by 1965. 
To bring political pressure on the Diem regime to end its repressive 
policies, the follm'ling measures '-Tere recommended: ( a) a continued wi th-
holding of funds in the commodity import program, but without formal 
annou..l1cement ; (b) suspension of approval of AID loans for the Saigon-
Cholon Haterworks and the Saigon Electric Pm'ler Proj ect; (c) suspension 
of support for Colonel Tung I s forces unless they "\-Tere transferred to the 
field and placed under JGS authority; (d) maintenance of purely "correct" 
relations bebveen the Ambassador and Diem (Ceneral Harkins I contact with 
the regime not to be suspended, hOI-lever). 
In subsequent evaluations of 
the success of these sanctions, the report stated: 
•.• the situation must be closely v.ratched to see what steps 
Diem i s taki ng to reduce repressive practices and to improve 
the effectiveness of the military effort. He should set no 
fixed criteria, but r ecognize that we 1,wul d have to decide in 
2··1.~ months "\-Thether to move to more drastic action or try to 
carryon with Diem even i f he had not taken significant steps. 
124/ 
Finally, the report recommended against our actively encouraging a coup, 
although it recommended seeking "urgently to identify and build contacts 
with an alternative leadership if and when it appears." 125/ 
The report is a curiously contradictory document. 
It "\-Tas, no doubt, 
a compromise bet'-leen General Harkins I view of the war I s progress as sup-
ported by General Taylor, and Secretary Mc}'~amara I s growing conviction of 
the gravity of the political crisis and its dire potential for the war 
effort. 
Its recommendations for aid suspensions and the announcement of 
U.S. troop withdrawals were obviously designed as measures, short of a 
withdravlal of U. S. support, that ,wuld create doubt vli.thin the Diem regime 
about U.S. intentions and i ncenti ves for policy changes. 126/ 
The fact 
that these sanctions would be seen by the generals as a signal of our 
willingness to accept alternative leadership -- i.e., a C01.l.]J -- does not 
seem to have figured in the recommendation, however, because elsewhere 
the report specifically rules out D,S. encouragement of "a change of 
government. II 1-27/ 
This is an important lapse in view of the generals I 
clear statement in August that they "lwuld regard an aid suspension as a 
coup signal. 
Nevertheless, the recommendations of the Hission met "\-!i th swift 
approval at the NSC on October 2, and later that day Secretary McHamara 
made the Presidentially approved statement to the press that included the 
announcement of the 1,000 man troop wi thdra,val by the end of the year. 128/ 
The statement reiterated the U. S. commitment to the struggle against in-
surgency and aggression in South Vietnam, noted the progress of the war, 
TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
announced the troop withdrmval, and dissociated the U.S. from the GVN's 
repressive policies. It aVOided, however, any reference to economic 
aid suspensions or other sanctions against the regime , thereby giving 
Diem a chance to come around ,dthout a public loss of face . 
On October 5, the President approved the specific military recom-
mendations of the r1chamara-Taylor report, IIbut directed that no formal 
announcement be made of the implementation of plans to wi thdravT 1,000 
U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963.
11 129/ 
The details of how 
the new policy '\vould be applied were spelled out in a long cable to 
Lodge fol101ving this meeting. 
The purpose of the nel'T course of action 
was described at the beginning of the message: 
Actions are designed to indicate to Diem Government our 
displeasure at its political policies and activities and to 
create signific:.a,nt uncertainty in that government and in key 
Vi~tn8mese groups as to future intentions of United States. 
At same time, actions are designed to have at most slight 
impact on military or cO'lmterinsurgency effort against Viet 
Cong, at l east in short term. 
The recommendat ions on negotiations are concerned vrith 
what U.S. is after, i.e., Gv}T action to i ncrease effective-
ness of its military effort; to ensure popular support to 
win vrar ; and to eliminate strains on U. S. Government and 
public confidence. 
The negotiating posture is designed not 
to lay down specific hard and fast demands or to set a dead-
line, but to produce movement in Vietnamese Government along 
these li.nes. 
In this way we can test and probe effectiveness 
of any actions the Gvn actually takes and, at the same time, 
maintain sufficient flexibility to permit U.S. to resume full 
support of Diem regime at ~ny time U.S. Govermnent deems it 
appropriate. 130/ 
. 
The cable goes on to acknowledge that the proposed sanctions can only be 
applied for 2-4 months before they begin to adversely affect the military 
effort, and therefore when that begins to happen recognizes that, 
" ••. further major decisions will be required.
1I 131/ 
The specific actions to be taken included: (1) suspension of the 
commodity import program without public announcement; (2) selective 
suspension of PL 480, on an item-by-item, sometimes monthly, basis, after 
referral to vJashington for revie\v ; (3) suspension of the loans for the 
Saigon-Cholon vTater,vorks and the Saigon Electric POvTer Proj ect; (4) noti-
fication to the GVN that financial support of Colonel Tung's forces ;"Tould 
be contingent on their co~mitment to field operations under JGS control, 
agai n without public announcement. 
Lodge was i nstructed to maintain his 
policy of "cool correctness in order to make Diem come to you, II but to be 
35 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
prepared to re-establish contact later if it did not vTork. 
Specifically 
he ,vas to seek improvements in the GVi'J military effort, as outlined in 
the HcKamara-Taylor report; in the GV1'~
' s internal policies that would 
restore popular confidence ; and in the GViJ's international (particularly 
American) public image and its attitudes and actions toward the U. S. 
Once again, ho·wever , the discussion of this new program of pressures did 
not allude to their impa.ct on the military nor how a coup initiative by 
the generals, stemming from such measures , should be dealt with . 
Thus, the Kennedy Administration, after a long month of se e.rching 
deliberations had made a far-reaching decision on American policy tOl-Jard 
South Vietnam. 
It had chosen to take the difficult and risky path of 
positive pressures against an ally to obtain from him compliance with 
our policies. 
To our good fortune, that policy was to be implemented 
by an Ambassador who not only supported it, but was uniquely equ:j.pped 
by background and temperament tb make it succeed. 
TOP SECRET 
Sensiti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV 
THE COUP MATURES 
~, OCTOBER 2-rOVE.MBER 1 
.1. 
The South Vietnamese Situation in October 
Through the month of September the GVH resorted to police state t.actics 
ever more frequently. 
The regime, no,v more than ever under Nhu' s dominance, 
lifted martial law September 16, but repressions against the Buddhist 
clergy cont.inued unabated. 
Students, down to t.he grade school level, 'Here 
arrest.ed and detained for t.he most minor of protests. 
Civil servants came 
under pressure to avoid contact with P~ericans, and to demonstrate their 
loyalty t.o t he ruling family. 
Regime-inspired rumors of impending mob 
attacks on U.S. facilities, and assassination lists of prominent Americans 
circulat.ed regularly. 1/ 
Then, on October 5, at. noon in t.he centra.l mar-
ket. place, another Buddhist monk burned himself to death, t.he first self .. 
immolation since the pagoda raids. 'i!:.,/ 
In t.his t.ense atmosphere, elections for t.he }~ational Assembly "Tere 
held on September 27 after a pro forma one-week campaign. 
Predictably, 
GVN candidates won oven.rhelming victories. 
The new assembly convened on 
October 7 to hear President Diem's state of the union message. 
Diem spoke 
mainly of South Vietnam's past. and present progress, playing dovn t.he 
internal political crisis, and made only scant reference to U. S. assist-
ance. 1/ 
As might have been expect.ed, he t.hrei' the blame for the Buddhist 
crisis on t.he Communists, foreign advent.urers, and the Hest.ern press. 
On the same day, Mme . Nhu arrived in the U.S. after a month i n Europe 
t.o begin a three"i,eek speaking . t.our. 
She immediat.ely l aunched into shrill 
denunciations of the Buddhists and of D.S. policy that. progressively 
alienated U. S. public opinion. 
She "Tas follo'Ned around t.he country by her 
father, the former Ambassador to the United States , however, vIho acted as 
a one-man trut.h squad revealing the inaccuracies and distort.ions of her 
st.at.ements . 
The Administration 's dignified and t.emperate reaction further 
discredited her att.acks. 
On October 8, the Ul: General Assembly voted to 
send a fact-finding team to South Vietnam t.o investigate the charges of 
repressions against Buddhists . 
2. 
The new American Policy 
Lodge's immediate reaction to t.he neiv policy approach ,.,as enthusias-
tic, It an excellent inst.ruction outlining a course of action ivhich should 
yield constructive results."!:J 
vJith the exception of the aid suspen-
sion, his views, in essence, had prevailed vTith both frIc:[amara and the 
President, t.he st.andard public kudos to military progress notwithstand-
ing . 
His plan was to allow the suspension of t.he commodity import pro·· 
gram, the l argest and most important of t.he economic sanctions, to become 
37 
TOP SECRET· Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'r - Sensitive 
evident ,d thout making any mention of it, and, by maintaining his aloof-
ness from official contact , force the regime to come to him . ~ On 
October 7, however, Lodge expressed some doubts about the real value of 
the political concessions itemized in State ' s instructions if our real 
goal was removal of l'Thu, an objective of questionable feasibility under 
the current circumstances . §) 
In view of Hhu 's increasing hostility 
to the U.S. presence and i nfluence, Lodge felt a request from the regime 
for a U. S. vii thdrawal was a distinct possibilit;)T. 
That same day, the regime 's reaction to the aid cut-off hit the 
streets with banner headlines in its mouthpiece, the Times of Vietnam: 
"USOM Freezes Economic Aid Program." 7/ 
The article accused the U. S. 
of subverting the 'war effort, and asserted that the cut-off had been 
decided in mid-September. 
Such fantastic pressure for p'etty reforms 
would jeopardize the entire revolutionary program of the government, it 
concluded. 
Lodge made no com.ment on the story. 
In mid-October, Lodge was re quested to provide Hashington with a 
"Teekly evaluation of the effects, both positive and negative, of the 
new policy. 8/ 
Lodge 's October 16 reply summarized the situ8,t10n as 
follows : 
"Sa far we appear to be getting virtually no effect from our 
actions under DEPI'EL 534, but we .. Tould not have expected effects this 
. early." 21 
Other reports indicated that the regime Ivas preparing to 
take a number of belt-tightening meaSlITeS, including r eductions in 
civil service salaries; that Chinese businessmen and bankers had begun 
to get jittery about currency stability; and that the government was 
planning to draw down its foreign exchange reserves to sustain import 
levels i n the face of the U. S. cut-off of CIP funds. 10/ 
A CIA memo-
randum concluded that the GVn reaction to the ne .. T U. S-.-policy, parti-
cularly the violent anti-U. S. campaign in the Times of Vietnam and the 
surveill ance and harassment of America..'1s and their employees, indicated 
that Diem and nhu .. Tere preparing for a long fight and were unmoved by 
the new policy. 11) 
Under Lodge's instructions, General Still'vell elvill.CV - J - 3) met with 
Secretary Thuan on October 17 and informed him of the impending cut-off 
of funds for the Special Forces , both MAP and CIA, unless the three CIA-
funded companies under Colonel Tung's command were placed under JGS 
control and transferred to the field. 12/ 
Thuan said he would take 
the matter up ivi th Diem inunediately. 
Harkins informed Diem directly of 
this action in a letter on October 18. 13/ 
General Don and Colonel 
Tung .. Tere also personally advised of the action, but again no public 
announcement I'Tas made. 
On October 26 it was learned that Tung and JGS 
were .. ,orking on plans to transfer his Special Forces to the Central 
Highlands. 14/ 
By then, however, coup plans "Tere well advanced and 
the significance of this transfer must be understood therein. 
Militarily, in October while the GVI'1 had taken some minor steps in 
line with the McNamara-Taylor recornTl1endations (such as agreeing to 
38 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
--
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
realign III and IV Corps bound,3.ries to give added emphasis to the Delta 
war), the combat situation cOY".tinued to "rorsen . 
The tempo of VC attacks, 
particularly i n the Delta, i ncreased; the \Veapons-loss ratio and casualty 
ratios deteri orated; and G'TN "mis sing in act.ion" increased . 15/ In 
Hashingt.on, furt.her doubt "Has cast on the optimism of previous reports 
by a controversial Stat.e Department. research study of October 22 . 16/ 
The memorandum took is sue vlith encouraging conclusions about the progress 
of the military campaign derived from statistical trends , pointing out 
important unfavorable trends r evealed by the same st.atistical data. 
In 
Saigon, KACV continued unsuccessfully to press Diem to take further st.eps 
to strengthen the war effort . 
Heanwhile, the U. S. i":ission had been feeling the i mpact of the neVi 
policy in internal strains of its OVTn. 
Hilpman reports that Lodge 
decided early in October that the recall of John Richardson , the CIA 
chief in Saigon, would be a useful additional pressure against Nhu because 
they had been closely identi fied. during nolting ' s ambassadorship, and 
because Richardson was kno~~ to favor a more conciliatory approach to 
the regime . 17/ 
ivhile there are no cables i n the available files to 
confirm it, Hilsman mai ntains that Lodge sent a private message to the 
President and CIA Director McCone request ing Richardson 's transfer. 
The 
President agreed, McCone acquiesced , and Hichardson Ivas r eturned to 
YJashington on October 5. 
'Ilhatever other motives may have been involved, 
Richardson had, in fact , been the specific object of an attack in the 
U. S. press on October 2 that had accused him of i nsubordination and had 
compromised his identity. 18/ 
It i s not surprising under such circum-
stances that he should havebeen transferred . 
Vlhatever the case, the 
press i nterpreted his recall as a slap at the regime, as Hil sman suggests 
Lodge wanted . 
This was only an i ncident i n the continuing series of stories by U. S. 
correspondents on divisions vlithin the mission . 
Lodge's relations with 
the press, hovrever , r emai ned excellent throughout his t our . 
He con-
scious l y cultivated the U. S. press corps with private luncheons , 
"backgrounders," and occasional leaks, and i t paid off for him personally . 
But the : press sharply attacked. those i n the mission , like Richardson and 
Harkins , with "ivhom they disagreed about U. S. policy. 
YJashington regis -
tered i ts concern that these stories, whatever their origin, were damag-
ing to the official posture of unity the U. S. 
C~vernment was trying to 
maintain i n the impl ementation of a difficult policy to"rard South Vi etnam. 19/ 
But the stories conti nued, even after the coup. 
--
In his weekly evaluation of the impact of the new U.S. policy on 
October 23 , Lodge was not encouraged by the r esults to date. 
"Diem/Hhu 
give every appearance of sitting tight and reacting to U. S. pressure with 
counter pressure and implying through publ ic statements that they can go 
it alone." 20/ 
Fevertheless, there "ivere several straws i n the "rind. 
Secretary Thuan had reported that Diem was worried and that he had i n·-
structed Thuan to a,sk Lodge if \'7ashington had reached any decisions' on 
39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
-----
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
commercial imports. 
Lodge also felt that the regime was being more care--
ful about repressive actions. 
Furthermore, experienced observers felt 
the U. S. policy was creating favorable conditions for a coup, although 
Lodge did not see anyone seriously considering it. 'I'he day after this 
message was sent, Lodge and his _'life v,ere invited by Diem to spend the 
next Sunday (the day after the National Day celebration) \-rith him at his 
villa in Dalat, after visiting an agricultural station and a strategic 
hamlet. 
Lodge promptly accepted. 
Diem had made the first move. 
vlashington instructed Lodge to use the occasion of the trip vii th 
Diem to test for movement by the GVV on any of the U.S. demands. 21/ 
Lodge _vas to take advantage of any subject of interest that Diem brought 
up to determine both the willingness of the government to make conces .. 
sions and the effect of our selective sanctions. If Diem did not provide 
such conversational opportunities, Lodge "Tas to assume the i nitiative . 
In particular, he was to inquire about changes i n the military campaign 
that had been recommended by the McYamara-Taylor mission and subsequently 
pressed by General Harkins; he was to suggest that Diem be cooperative 
to the UN investigatory team that had arrived in the cOlliltry on October 24, 
and a.llow them full access to inform2.tion and people; and he was to inquire 
whether Diem did not think it time to end the bitter anti-American cam-
paign of the Times of Vietnam and the Fhus . 
Lodge I S Sunday with Diem on October 27, the day after the Hational 
Day celebration, vIaS frustrating in almost all respects. 
Diem did bring 
up several issues of interest , but gave no indication that he had changed 
his position or his attitude about the Buddhists or the U.S. 22/ 
He did 
i nquire about the suspension of the commercial import program to ivhich 
Lodge i nquired in reply about the release of Buddhists and students from 
jail, the reopeni ng of the schools, and the elimination of anti-BUddhist 
discrimination. 
Diem offered excuses and complaints as usual. 
Taking 
the initiative, Lodge complained to Diem of the public opinion pressure 
that his policies were placing the President under i n the U. S. 
He com-
plained about the physical attacks on U. S. newsmen and about Bme Ehu I S 
inflammatory remarks in the U. S. as examples of the kind of thing Diem 
could prevent that would enhance his public image in the U. S. and the 
world. 
Lodge describes the end of the conversation in this manner: 
When it was evident that the conversation was practically 
over, I said: "Iv!r. President , every single specific suggestion 
,·rhich I have made , you have rejected. 
Isn't there some one 
thing you ~ay think of that is within your capabilities to do 
and that \<!oul d favorably impress U. S. opinion? " 
As on other 
previous occasions when I asked him similar questions , he gave 
me a blank look and changed the subject . 
23/ 
While Lodge sa\<l no movement on the basis of the conversation, he nonethe-
less suggested that consideration be given in vlashi ngton to what we \vould 
40 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP S~C?BT - Sensitive 
consider adequa.te response on Diem I s part for a resumption of the como. 
mercial import program. 
J:'he follm<iing day, after Lodge had related the 
disappointing results of the conversation to Secretary Thuan over 
l uncheon, the latter observed that the U. S. really wasn't asking much 
and that perhaps the conversation with Diem had been a beginning. 24/ 
In retrospect , the comment is iro ~ ic, for with the coup only five days 
away, the October 27 conversation i"as in reality a pathetic ending not 
a hopeful beginning. 
At one level, attention n01,o, turned to Lodge' s sch~duled trip to 
Washington OctOber 31. 
The exact purpose of the trip remains a mystery. 
On October 30, he sent a cable to c:iashington ' ..... i th some suggestions of 
steps by the GVH that Uashington m.ig~t consider adequate for resuming 
the commercial import program under various 'conditions , steps which he 
hoped to discuss when he arrived. 25/ 
n01,orever , earlier in October, 
Lodge had sent a private note to l'lcGeorge Bundy, asking that the Presi-
dent make hilu available for a triu to Vietnam to discuss with Lodge a 
matter which Lodge did not feel f;ee to enter into through any electronic. 
communication channel. 26/ 
The following cryptic reference suggests 
that ,·rhatever the mysterious subj ect Lodge had in mind, it vTaS the pur-
pose for the planned trip to viashington at t he end of October: 
Regarding my '<lire, I appreciate your willingness to send 
Bundy. 
Would not have brought this up if I did not have a 
proposal "'hich I think contains ne',,' ideas and which might just 
change the situation here for the better. It cannot be properly 
handled by telegram or letter and requires a chance for me to 
have a dialogue 'with Rusk and/or Harriman and/or Bundy . 
I wired 
Bundy because I cannot leave here immediately, but I could come 
for one working day to 'IJashington after Vietnamese National Day 
on October 26 and dedication of Vietnamese Atomic Energy Plant 
on October 28, returning here ilmediately thereafter, and would 
be glad to do it." 27/ 
In order to shorten Lodge's absence fram Saigon and to add flexibility to 
his departure timing, the President dispatched a military aircraft to 
Saigon and left it .at his disposal. 
But as the October 31 date arrived, 
it coincided with the momentary anticipation of a move by the generals. 
Lodge, no doubt preferred to remain in control of U.S. actions during a 
coup rather than see Harki ns take over, as vJashington' s instructions for 
his absence stipulated, and so, he postponed his 01,om departure. 
3. 
Renevred Coup Plotting 
vlhile Diem's reaction to the tough nevl American policy was hostile, 
the senior South Vietnffiuese generals , predictably, interpreted the new 
policy as a green light for a coup. 
Plotting was reactivated almost 
immediately, if indeed it had ever been completely dormant. 
41 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
On October 2, the day the Mc::'Iamara-Taylor mission reported to the 
President, General Don Ifaccidentally" encountered Lt Colonel Conein, 
the CIA contact man in the August plot, at Tan Son Nhut airport and 
asked him to meet him that night in ~ha Trang. ~ Truehart approved 
the contact, instructing Conein to neither encourage nor discourage a 
coup but only to get information. 
At the meeting, General Don said that 
General r·linh I'Tanted to meet "lith Conein at 8:00 a.m. on October 5 at 
JGS headquarters at which time Minh ",ould be able to go into the details 
of the generals ' plan. 
Don emphatically stated that there was a plan, 
and that essential to it was the conversion of General Dinh, III Corps 
commander , to the cause. 
So, "Ti th Lodge 's approval, Cone in met General l1inh on October 5. 
Getting straight to the point, "General Mi nh stated that he must knoVT 
American Government 's position with respect to a change in the Govern-
ment of Vietnam within the very near future." 29/ 
The government's 
c 
loss of popular support was endangering the whole war effort, which was 
deteriorating rapidly. 
He did not expect any U.S. support, but needed 
assurances the U.S. would not th,'Tart the attempt. 
Also involved, he 
said, "I"ere Generals Don, Khiem and Kim . 
Of three possible and not 
mutually exclusive plans mentioned by Minh, two involved military action 
against loyal units in Saigon, and one was an assassination plot against 
brothers Nhu and Can, but not Diem. 
Conein remained noncommittal about 
both U. S. support and the various plans. 
Minh then expressed doubt about 
General Khiem whom he suspected of having played a double role in August, 
but indicated that the generals would have to act soon to forestall 
abortive attempts by lower echelon officers. 
Minh hoped to meet vlith 
Conein in the near future to go over the detailed plan of operations. 
Conein was again noncommittal and Viinh said he understood. 
Lodge, with Harkins r concurrence, recommended that when Minh, about 
whom he "Tas row dubious after his August experience, approached Conein 
again, he be told: (1) that the U. S. would not thwart his plans; (2) that 
we would be willing to revievT his plans, except those for assassinations; and 
(3) "that U.S. aid will be continued to Vietnam under government which 
gives promise of gaining support of people and winning the war against 
the Communists. II 30/ 
In pressing Minh for details of the planned composi-
tion of a successor regime , Lodge felt we should stress the need for a 
"good proportion of well qualified civilian leaders in key positions." 31/ 
A message emanating from an NSC meeting was sent to Lodge on the 
same day and appears to have been dispatched before the arrival of the CAS 
report on the Conein-l-Hnh meeting and Lodge's comment . 
In it the Presi-
dent specifically instructed Lodge to avoid encouraging a coup. 
The 
message stated: 
•.• President today approved r ecommendation that no 
initiative should now be taken to give any active covert 
encouragement to a coup. 
There shOUld, however, be urgent 
covert effort with closest security under broad guidance 
\ 
42 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
of Ambassador to identify and build contacts with possible 
alternative leadership as and w'hen it appears. 
Essential 
that this effort be totally secure and fully deniable and 
sepa.rated entirely from nonnal po lit ical analysis and report-
ing and other activi ties of countery te8111. 
vIe. repeat that 
this effort is not repeat not to be aimed at active promotion 
of coup but only at surveillance and readiness. 
In order to 
provide plausibility to denial suggest you and no one else in 
Embassy i ssue these i nstruction orally to Acting Station Chief 
and hold him responsible to you alone for making appropriate 
contacts and reporting to you alone. 32/ 
I'P 
Responding the next day, October 6, to the report of the Conein-Minh 
meeting, Washington r eferred to the preceding day's cable, but, prompted 
by Lodge 's suggestion, added: 
~Thile we do not wish to stimulate coup, we also do not 
wish to l eave impression that U.S. would thwart a change of 
government or deny economic and military assistance to a 
new regime if it appeared capable of increasing effectiveness 
of military effort, ensuring popular support to win war and 
improving -~TOrk ing relat ions with U. S. 
v.Te would like to be 
informed on "That is being contemplated but we should avoid 
being drawn into reviewing or advising on operational plans 
or any other act which might tend to identify U.S. too 
closely with change in government. 33/ 
WaShington was, further, greatly concerned about the security and denia-
bility of any further contacts and suggested to Lodge that someone could 
be brought in from outside Vietnam for follow-up contacts if he thought 
it necessary. 
Lodge apparently did not. 
An important apparent lacuna in the available message traffic occurs 
at this point. 
By Shaplen' s ac count, a CAS officer met .. rith Minh on 
October 10 and conveyed the substance of the U.S. position as defined in 
CAP 14228. 
31..~/ 
\I)"hether or not the date is accurate, it is probable that 
some such contact took place by mid-October. 
On October 20 a Colonel 
Khuong at JGS contacted an American counterpart and reported a coup plot 
involving Minh, Khiem, Kim, and a fourth unidentified general, plus a 
number of colonels. 35/ 
He ,,;as seeking assurances of U. S. support 
following a coup. 
--
There were no further reported contacts with the generals Qntil 
October 23 when Conein again met with Don at the latter's initiative. 36/ 
In a state of agitation, Don stated that the coup had been scheduled to 
take advantage of the October 26 I-":-ational Holiday, but that on October 22 
Harkins had called on him to report the Khuong contact and to discourage 
a coup. 
Don further i ndicated that the palace had lea.rned of Khuong ' s 
overtures, implying that Ear kins was responsible, and had taken action 
43 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(' 
to ensure that the vital 5th and 7th Divisions v[ould be avIaY from Saigorl. 
Don demanded to kno"l what the U. S. attitude ''las to .... lard a coup. 
Cone in 
reiterated the \{ashington guidance . 
Apparently relieved, Don asked 
Conein to assure Lodge that Khuong i'laS not a member of the coup committee 
and ''lOuld be punished. 
He indicated that the generals had avoided con-
tacting Lodge directly at a party on October 18 because of the presence 
of members of Harkins ' staff. 
Conein then asked for proof of the existence 
of the coup group and its plan. · Don said that if they could meet the 
following day, he would give Conein, EYES OlJLY for Lodge, the political 
organi zation plan. 
In a subsequent conversation with :rtarkins on the matter, Lodge 
reported that Harkins confirmed his demarche to Don on October 22, and 
after they had reviewed CAP 74228, said he had misunderstood the policy 
and hoped he had not upset any delicate arrangements. J]} 
Earkins added 
that he '''0uld inform Don that his previous statements did not reflect 
U. S. Government policy. 
By Harldns ' account, he had not violated Hoshington' s guidance in 
his conversation with Don. 38/ 
He ,'laS merely trying to discourage 
Vietnamese officers from approaching U.S. counterparts about coup plots 
which only detracted from the i'rar effort. 
Furthermore, Don had at no 
time mentioned coup planning to him. 
~e concluded by cormnenting about 
the renewed plotting by the generals that: 
Thoug...h I am not trying to th-wart a change in government, 
I think we should take a good hard look at the group ' s pro-
posals to see if we think it would be capable of increasing 
the effectiveness of the military effort . 
There are so 
many coup groups maki ng noises that unless elements of all 
'are included I'm afraid there will be a continuous effort to 
upset whoever gains control for sometime out and this to me 
will interfere with the "rar effort. ]2/ 
This incident once again highlighted the differing outlooks of the 
.A..mbassador and NACV and underscored the lack of close coordination 
between t hem. 
Unfortunately, it did not lead to any improvement in 
the situation . 
The close identification of 2arkins with Diem made the 
Vietnamese generals mistrust him. 
Lodge , responsive to their great 
sensitivity about security, tended to restrict information about the 
contacts and coup plans to himself . 
In response to this contact by Don, vlashington reflected mainly 
concern that he might be acting as an agent of the palace to lead us 
dmm the garden path. 40/ 
As he had indicated, Don contacted Conein 
on the morning of the 24th, but not with the promised plans. 41/ 
He 
reported t hat the previous evening Harkins had spoken to him,-Correcting 
his earlier statements about the nondesirability of a change of govern-
ment. 
Don further said he had a scheduled meeting with I~dge that 
44 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
evening (which Lodge denied.) and that plans vTere nm\' far advanced for a 
coup sometime before november 2 . 
He as}~ed Conein t.o meet him later that 
afternoon to discuss the details of the plru1. 
In a separate cable dis-
puting some of Lodge s i nterpretati ve description of his statement to 
Don, Harki ns stated that he had. repulsed Don 1 s su.ggestion that they meet 
agai n to discuss the coup plans. 
III told Don that I Ilould not discuss. 
coups th8,t "i{ere not my business though I had heard rumors of m~my . 
~!3/ 
Taylor replied immediately, S1 ating, "View' here is t.hat your actions in 
disengaging from the coup discussion were correct and that you should 
continue to avoid any involvement." 43/ 
A Conein I s meeting wi th Don on the evening of the 24th, the l atter 
i ndicated he had misunderstood General Harkins and had not seen Lodge . 44/ 
He said that the coup committee had r efused to release any plans because 
of its anxiety about breaches of security. 
He did promise to t urn over 
to Conein for Lodge's r evievT detailed pl ans of the operation and the 
proposed successor gover mnent t"ivo days before the coup , which he 
r eiterated liould take place b efor e lTovember 2. 
At this j uncture, the nature of the dialogue beti,reen Lodge and the 
vlhi te House began to cha..l1ge . 
On October 25 , Lodge sent McGeor ge Bmldy 
a long cable t aking exce:;:,tion to Harki ns 1 reservations about a coup and 
arguing for a policy of flnot thwarting." 45/ 
Eo successor government 
could bungle the "rar as badly as Diem had-,-he argued, and, furthermore , 
for us to prevent a change of government '\'lOuld be "assuming an undue 
r es[>onsibility for k eepi ng the incumbents in office.
1I ~6/ 
In his reply, 
Bundy eXIlressed the Hhite House anxiety about reaping the blame for an 
unsuccessful coup . 
He are particularly concerned about hazard that an unsuccess-
ful coup, however carefully \'re avoid di rect engagement , will be 
l aid at our door by publ ic opinion almost eve ryvrl'ler e . 
Therefore, 
while sharing your view that we shoul d not be i n position of 
thvrarting coup, we would like to have option of judging and "Tarn-
ing on any plan 'l'rith poor prospects of success . 
~'Ie recognize that 
this is a l arge order, but President wants you to know of our 
con c ern ~ 47/ 
The discus s ion of these issues dominated the cable traffic between Lodge 
and the White House up to the day of the coup, with r,'Tashington concerned 
about detailed pl ans and prospects for success and Lodge stressing the 
irrevocability of our involvement . 
There were no further contacts with the coup group until t he day 
after the fruitless Lodge-Diem conversations. 
That Monday, Oct ober 28 , 
J..J0dge and Diem were lee.ving Saigon for Dalat to dedicate the Vietna..mese 
At omic Ener gy Pl ant. 
At the airport before their departure , Gener al Don 
daringly took Lodge aside and asked if Conein was authorized to speak for 
him. ~ Lodge assured Don that he "Tas . 
Don s ai d that the coup must 
1'OP SECRET - Sens i tive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
be thoroughly Vietna.mese and that the U. S. must not interfere. 
Lodge 
agreed, adding that the U. S. vranted no satellites but 'Ivould not th"Tart 
a coup. 
vThen Lodge asked about the timing of the coup, Don replied that 
the generals vTere not yet ready . 
Later that evening Conein met Don by prearrangement at the latter ' s 
ini tiative. 49/ 
~Then Conein called Don' s attention to I..odge I s scheduled 
trip to VJashiri-gton on October 31, indicating that it was important for 
him to revie'l'l the coup plans before his departure, Don replied that the 
p l ans might not be available until four hours i n advance , but urged that 
the Ambassador not change his plans as this might be a tip-off. 
Don said 
that nothing VTould happen in the next 48 hours , but the implication 'I-TaS 
that the coup would r.re~·empt Lodge's departure. 
~'lhen pressed for details 
of the planning, Don 
i ndic8~ted that liithin the committee , Minh had charge 
of the military plans for the operation, Kim \':'as doing the political 
planning, and he, Don , was the liaison vrith the Americans . 
They had 
surrounded GeneTal Dinh vi th coup supporters and he vTould be neutralized. 
Generals Tri and Khanh Here both involved in the planning. 
General Khiem 
was being circULYlspect because he viaS lEider pala~ce suspicion . 
Minor details 
of the plan and a list of units supporting the coup were also discussed. 
Simultaneous separate contacts had confirmed that several i mportant 
opposition civilians were i n contact vii th the generals , i ncluding Phan 
Huy Quat, Bui Diem, and Tran Trung Dlmg, and that they expected to play 
a role in the post-coup goverruflent, which rej)ortedly woul d be headed by 
Vice President Tho . 
In a cable dispatched that same day summarizing the 
situation , Lodge expressed some concern at the possibility of a premature 
coup by junior officers, but generally expressed confidence in the generals 
while regretting their reluctance for security reasons to provide details 
of their pl ans . 50/ 
He concluded in these words: 
In summary, it 'i!ould appear that a coup attempt by the 
Generals ' group is imminent; that 'Ivhether this coup fails or 
succeeds, the USC must be prepared to accept the fact that vTe 
will be blamed, hm·rever unjustifiably ; and finally , that no 
pOl?itive action by the USG can prevent a coup atterapt short 
of informing Diem and Elm "idth all the opprobrium that such 
an action 'l<Tould entail. 
Note too Don ' s statement vie will 
only have four hours notice . 
This rules out my checking with 
you bet"i<ieen time I learn of coup and time that it starts . 
It 
means US will not be able significantly to influence course 
of events . 51/ 
Lodge ' s view 'l<TaS clear . 
vT e were conrmi tted and it was too late for second 
thoughts . 
Noreover, vThen the balloon "rent up he did not expect to have 
time to consult vlashington. 
He expected , and probably preferred, to 
guide events himself. 
In view of the deteriorat ing situation, instructions were given to 
Admiral Felt , CINCPAC , to have a task force stand off the Vietnemese 
TOP SECHET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
coast for the possible evacuation of j\merican dependents and civil:i.a..l1s 
if events required. 52/ 
This vlaS a re-enactment of a similar alert 
during the abortive August coup. 
In Washington, I,lcFamara and the JCS had become concerned. about the 
differing vievTs of Lodge and Harkins as to the correct U. S. course of 
action. 53/ 
]\lore importantly, they were alarmed at the apparent break-
down of communication and coordination bet"Teen the Ambassador and Mf'.CV . 
The cable traffic tended lito form a picture of a relationship which l acks 
the depth and continuity required by the complex circumstances in Saigon. "5L~'; 
Harkins ' suggestions for improving their rapport vTere invited. 
After the -
. 
HSC meeting on October 29, the ~'Thi te House vTas also concerned and instructed 
Lodge to shoYl Harkins the relevant cables and be sure he ,vas fully a .... lare 
of the coup arrangements, since during rJodge t s absence in VTa.shington 
Harkins would have overall responsibility for the U.S. ]5/ 
These tvTO cables triggered a flurry of strong opposing react ions 
from Lodge and Harkins. 
Harkins , belatedly apprised of the recent Conein-
Don contacts and of Lodge ' s evaluations and recommendations , took bitter 
exception to the Ambassador's conclusions in three separate cables on 
October 30. 
He particularly r esented Lodge ' s independent , gloomy assess-
ments of how the war ,,,as gOing, which "Tere at direct odds with his own 
viel'[s , vie,,,s I'Thich he had provided Lodge for inclusion in his ,.;reekly 
reports to Hashington . 57/ 
As to U. S. policy t01trard a coup, he was irate 
at having been excludedby Lodge from information and consultation about 
the continuing contacts "Tith the generals. 58/ 
The heart of the issue, 
hmvever , was a disagreement about vThat was, in fact, U. S. policy to-vrard 
a coup as defined by the VTashington guidance cables. 
Harkins outlined 
the disagreement in a separate October 30 cable to Taylor: 
There is a basic difference apparently bet',veen the .Am-
bassador's thinking and mine on the i nterpretation of the 
guidance contained i n CAP 63560 dated 6 October ( see Appen-
dix) and the additional thoughts, I repeat, thoughts expressed 
in CAS Washington 74228 dated 9 October (Appendix). 
I i nter-
pret CAP 63560 as our basic guidance and that CAS 74228 being 
addi tional thoughts did not change the b asic guidance in that 
no initiative should now be taken to give any active covert 
encouragement to a coup. 
The Ambassador feels that 74228 does 
change 63560 and that a change of government is desired and 
feels as stated in CAS Saigon 1964 (Appendix) that the only 
way to bring about such a change is by a coup. 
I'm not opposed to a change i n government, no i ndeed, but 
11m inclined to feel the.t at t his time the change should be in 
methods of governing rather than complete change of persoJ:l.J1e L 
I have seen no batting order proposed by any of the coup groups . 
I think ,,!e should take a hard look at any proposed list before 
we make any decisions. 
In my contacts here I have seen no one 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
./ 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEC;:mT - Sensitive 
vTith the strength of character of Diem, at least in fighting 
connnunists. Certainly there are no Generals qualified to 
take over in my opinion. 
I am not a Diem man per se. 
I certainly see the faults 
. in his character. 
I am hereto back 14 million 8'1,11:; peoj:'le in 
their leader at this time. 
-x-
-x-
-x· 
I would suggest we not try to change horses too quickly. 
That we continue to taJl:e persuasive actions that vrill make 
the horses change their course and methods of action . 
That 
we vlin the military effort as quickly a,s possible, then let 
them make any and all the changes they vrant. 
After all, rightly or v:rongly, we have backed Di em for 
eight long hard years. 
To me it seems incongruous nov! to get 
him dovlD, kick him around, and get rid of hi1n. 
The US has 
been his mother superior and father confessor since he ' s been 
i n office and he has leaned on us heavily. 58/ 
The f i rst y,Tashington message to Lodge on October 30 revealed that 
Hhite House anxiety about the possible failure of a coup attempt , 
already evident on October 25 in CAP 63590 ( see _A_ppendix) , he,d increa,sed.2.2I 
The CIA ' s evaluation of the balance of forces cast doubt on vlhether the COU~0 
group could pull off a decisive action. 60/ 
~Hth these concerns in mind , 
'lVashington could not accept Lodge ! s judgment 
If that no positive action by 
the USG can prevent a coup attemp ... II 61/ 
The Whi te House view \'laS that : 
... our attitude to coup grou~ can still have decisive 
effects on its decisions. 
vTe believe that what vle say to 
coup group can produce delay of coup and that betrayal of 
coup plans to Diem is not repeat not our only way of stopp-
i ng coup . §]j 
I n a long reply (in vThich Harkins did Dot concur), Lodge was at pai ns to 
point out his pmverlessness to prevent \vhat '\oras fundamentall y a Vi etnamese 
affair , short of revealing it to the palace . 
vIe must , of course, get best possible estimate of chance 
of coup ' s success and this estimate must color our thi nking, 
but do not t hi nk we have the power to delay or discourage a 
coup . 
Don has made it clear many times that this i s a Viet-
namese affair . 
It i s theoretically possible for us to turn 
over the information which has been given to us 'in confidence 
to Diem and this 'would undoubtedly stop the coup and '\olOuld 
make traitors out of us. 
For practical purposes therefore I 
48 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
lvould say that I·re have very little influence on what is 
essentially a Vietn21llese affair. 
In addition, this would 
place the heads of the Generals, their civilian supporters, 
a,nd Im-Ter military officers on the spot, thereby sacrific .. 
ing a significa.nt portion of the civilian and military 
l eadership needed to carry the war against the VC to its 
successful conclusion. 
After our efforts not to discourage 
a coup and this change of heart, -v!e vrould foreclose any 
possibili ty of change of the GVN for the better . 
* 
-)(-
-x-
-lE-
As regards your paragraph 10 (question of determination 
B.nd force of character of coup leaders), I do not kno1t: what 
more proof can be offered than the fact these men are ob-
viously prepared to risk their lives and that they vmnt noth-
ing for themselves. 
If I am any judge of human nature, Don ' s 
fa,ce expressed sincerity and determination on the morning 
that I spoke to him. 
Heartily agree that a miscalculation 
could jeopardize position i n Southeast Asia . 
vIe also run 
tre~endous risks by dOing nothing . 63/ 
'.'Thether Lodge seriously believed this or merely used it as an argumenta-
tive excuse for not entertaining the possibility of intervention to delay 
or stop an llilviable attempt is not clear. 
His defense of the plotters 
and his support for their goal in this telegraphic dialogue with vJashing-
ton , hOvTever, clearly shOl"'- his emotional bias in favor of a coup. 
El se-
where i n the cable Lodge obj ected to the designation of Harkins as the 
Chief of 1·1ission i n the event of a coup during his absence . 
The tone and content of these parallel messages from Harkins and 
I"odge only heightened IfIhite House anxiety and, no doubt, r aised concern 
about the obj ectivity of these tvro principal D. S. observers of the criti-
cal Vietnamese situation. 
In an effort to clear the air, explicitly re-
define and restate the policy guidance, and clarify the assi gnment of 
roles and respons ibilities 1-rithin the !iflission , the Ttihite House sent still 
another cable to Saigon later on October 30 . 64/ 
Taking pointed issue 
with Lodge's View, the message stated: 
--
We do not accept as 8. basis for US policy that we have no 
pOVier to delay or discourage a coup . 
In your paragraph 12 
you say that if you 'were convinced that the coup ,vas going to 
fail you would of course do everything you could to persuade 
coup l eaders to stop or delay any operation 1-Thich, i n your 
best j udgement, does not clearly give high prospect of success. 
vre have never considered any betraya l of generals to Diem, and 
our 79109 explicitly rejected that course. 
He recognize the 
danger of appearing hostile to generals, but we believe t hat our 
own position should be on as firm groli.l1d as poss ible , hence I·re 
cannot limit ourselves to proposition implied in your message 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRJi;T - Sensitive 
that only conviction of certain failure justifies interven-
tion . 
He believe that your standard for intervention should 
be that sta,ted above. 
Therefore, if you should conclude that there i s not 
clearly a high prospect of success, you should communicate 
this doubt to generals in a way calculated to persuade them 
to desist at least until chances are better. 
In such a com-
munication you should use the \',eight of uS best advice and 
explicitly reject any implication that vre oppose the effort 
of the generals because of preference for present regime . 
Ive recognize need to bear i n mind generals' i nterpretation 
of US role in 1960 coup attempt and your agent should main-
tain clear distinction betvreen strong and honest advice 
given as a friend and any opposition to their objectives. 65/ 
Lodge was also urgently requested to obtain more detailed information 
about the compos ition of the forces the coup leaders expected to have 
at their disposal so that we could better assess their prospects. 
IHth regard to Lodge ' s absence , the instructions placed Truehart in 
charge lmless a COUD occurred 
i n which case Harkins \'i'Ould be Chief of 
-
, -
Mission . 
The desirability of having Lodge on the scene i n the event of 
a coup, hmvever, was stressed and he was encouraged to delay his depar-
ture if he thought the coup was i mminent. 
The following four-point 
standing instructions for U. S. posture i n the event of a coup were al so 
given: 
a. 
US authorities ,.;rill r ej ect appeals for direct inter-
vention from either Side, and US-controlled aircraft and other 
r esources will not be committed between the battl e lines or 
i n support of either side , vIi thout authorization from '\rJ e.shing-
ton . 
b. 
In event of indecisive contest, US authorities may i n 
their discretion agree to perform any acts agreeable to both 
sides , such as removal of key personalities or relay of infor-· 
mation . . In such actions , however , US authorities 'Ivill stren-
uously avoid appearance of pressure on either side . 
It i s not 
i n the interest of USG to be or appear to be either i nstrument 
of existing goverxunent or instrument of coup. 
c. 
In the event of imminent or actual fai lure of coup, US 
authorities may afford asylum in their discreti on to those to 
whom there is any express or implied obligation of this sort. 
ide bel ieve, hO't'ever, that in such a case it woul d be in our 
i nterest and probably in interest of those seeking asylum that 
they seek protection of other Embassies in addition to our O'.m. 
This point should be made strongly if need arises . 
50 
TOP SECRET - Jensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR:~T - Sensitive 
d. 
But once a coup under responsible leadership has begun, 
and id thin these restrictions, it is i n tbe i nterest of the 
US Government that i t should succeed. §6/ 
With re spect to i nstruction d . , hoviever , no specific act ions .to support 
or guarantee the success o f a coup vTere authorized . 
This message ,,!as 
the l ast guidance Lodge received from vJashin;ton before the coup began. 
51 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1. 
The Coup 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECR}<;T - Sensitive 
v 
THE COUP AND ITS AFTERt·iA.TH - IWVEHBER 1 -
23 
The atmosphere of Byzantine intri.gue in Saigon in the fall of 1963 
made it virtually impossible to keep track of all the plots against the 
regime. 
In one of his last messages to 'VJashington before the coup, 
Lodge identified ten individual dissident groups in addition to the 
generals I group. Y 
These vari.ous plots vlere highly fluid in composi-
tion and quixotic in character, quickly appearing, disappearing and/or 
merging with other groups. 
There were, hm'lever , two groups that came 
into existence in the summer and retained their identity with some 
mutation until near the end. 
The first, chronologically, 'Was variously 
i dentified as the Tuyen or Thao group after its successive leaders. It 
was conceived sometime in June by Dr . Tran Kim Tuyen, the Dir ector of 
Politic al Studies (national intelligence) under Diem, and invol ved ele-
ments of the Ministries of Civic Action and Information and certain ele-
ments of the Army. 
VThen Dr. Tuyen vms sent out of the country in 
September, the group was more or less merged ,1ith a separate group of 
middle level officers headed by Lt Colonel Phamh Goc Thao . 
Several 
dates vTere established by this group for a coup during the summer and 
f all, but each time critical military units ,'Jere temporarily transferred 
by either the palace or the JGS, under General Don, each of ,.;hom was 
someHhat avTare of the group I s plans and was interested in frustrating 
t hem. 
In the end, it concerted efforts 'with the generals as the only 
al ternative vTi th prospects of success . 
The second group was , of course, composed of the senior general s 
of the Vietnamese Army. 
Plotting by this group also began i n earnest 
i n June. 
Initially, its leader was identifi ed as General Khiem and l ater 
General Don, but the de facto leader throughout vlas , no doubt, General 
, Minh who cOllunanded by far the greatest respect and allegiance within the 
officer corps. 
The four principal members of the group 'VTere Gen eral s 
Minh, Don, Khiem, and Kim, al l of whom "Tere stationed i n Saigon vlithout 
troop conlllland , the latter three at JGS and General Hinh as a palace 
military advisor . 
Generals Tri and Khanh, I and II Cor.,ps commanders 
respectively, were secondary members OI~ the generals I group, but were 
also in touch with the Thao group. 
The abortive attempt by the generals 
to launch a coup in August has already been described in detail. 
Impor-
tant lessons seem to have been learned by these men from that experience , 
for vThen they again began to set their plans and make arrangements it 
vTaS with great attent ion to detail and ~ith an explici t division of l abor. 
Among the plotters, General M-lnh had the overe.ll direction of the 
coup activities, although the group acted i n committee fashion "id th t he 
members apparently voting at several points on parti cular actions . 
He 
52 
TO? SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP 
S:~C3E(;' - Sensitive 
was also responsible for the military operation of the coup itself. 
General Don ,vas the liaison ,.,rith the Americans and responsible for 
wooing General Dinh. 
General Kbn handled planning for the post - coup 
government and the relations with the civilian groups that "rere ex-
pected to be called on to support the coup.?J 
General Khiem was to 
playa critical role at the end of October as the liaison man "Tith the 
Thao coup group in working out the details of their support and inte·· 
gration into the actual execution of the coup. 
As already noted, the fundamental problem of the plotters ,\'as their 
l ack of troop cornmand in the immediate Saigon area. 
The l\Igo family ' s 
longstanding fear of military coups, as previously discussed, had been 
the main factor in all military command assignments and promotion policy. 
l'~owhere "Ias loyalty a more important prerequisite for coinmand than in I 
Saigon, the surrounding III Corps, and the nearby IV Cor:9s , with its 
headqua.rters only iW miles away dO\m Highvray 4. 
In addition to the 
sizable special forces units in Saigon under Colonel'Tung and the various 
national police and paramilitary units that a1'so took their orders directly 
from the palace, Diem had appointed the vain, ambitious , aIld supposedly 
loyal General Dinh as Commander of III Corps ( vThose 5th Division was 
stationed at nearby Bien Hoa) and the Saigon Military District. 
Further-
more, the r{ Corps was commanded by General Ca.o, vTho had saved Diem 
during the 1960 coup by bringing his loyal 7th Division troops up from 
My Tho . 
It was on this formidable line-up of forces that the family had 
staked its survival; a...n.d not '-lithout reason, as the frustrated coup of 
August demonstrated. 
Saigon, hm-lever, was not entirely without dissident elements . 
\'lith 
the exception of their commanders, the ;'.Iarine battalion, the airborne 
battalion, and the Air Force were all sympathetic to a coup. 
But the 
plotters knevl that a favorable balance of forces could not be achieved 
or maintained vri thout either the conversion or neutralization of Generals 
Dinh and Cae. 
During the August pagoda raids, Dinh had been given overall command 
of the crackdovTD, although Tung had taken his instructions as all·rays 
directly from Nhu in carrying out the attacks . ]) 
Thereafter, Dinh, 
who was a notorious braggart , boasted that he had saved the country f rom 
the Buddhists , Communists , and "foreign adventurers.1! 
Carried alva.Y'-lith 
himself, he held a news conference on August 27 in which he was harried 
and finally humiliated by antagonistic _4.1llerican journalists . 
The plotting 
generals decided that they would play on his vanity and egoism to win him 
over to their side. 
With his pride injured at the hands of the newsmen, 
Dinh was easy prey to Don ' s suggestion that Khu had. played him for a fool, 
but that be r eally was a national hero , and that the regime vTas indebted 
to him. 
Don suggested that Dinh go to Diem vJith a plan to i ncrease mili-· 
t ary participation in the goverrnnent, specifically that he, Dil;h, be 
named Minister of Interior. 
Don rightly expected that Diem would be 
outraged at such a brazen request, and vrould repriman.d Dinh, further 
53 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECR~r - Sensitive 
.. rounding his pride and alienating him from the regime. 
Diem reacted 
as expected, and ordered Dinh to take a "vacB.tion
tl in Dalai; for a while. 
Don at this point began his long effort to 1'1'00 Dinh to the plotters 
side against Diem. 
Dinh, hm'Tever, lacked self-confidence and vacillated, 
although he does not appear to have played a double role by revealing 
t he existence of the plot to the palace. 
\'ihile the elaborate stratagems 
for seducing Dinh ,,{ere taldng place, the plotters had carefully sur-
rounded him "lith supporters of the coup, including his deputy, Colonel Co, 
whom they felt they could rely on to neutralize him if he sho'vred signs 
of rallying to the family once the balloon was up. 
By the end of the 
third week in October, the plotters felt reasonably confident that the 
problem of Dinh had been resolved: he v:auld, as an opportunist, rally 
to the coup if he felt i t vias going to succeed; if he did not, he would 
be eliminated . 
At the same time, plans had been under vlay to neutralize General Cao, 
the 11 Corps conrrnander, since he would certainly b~tray the plotters to 
the palace if he got word of the plans, or bring his troops to Diem's 
aid if the coup started while he ,vas still in control of them. 
To do 
this, Colonel Co , Dinh' s deputy, vTaS sent to the Delta to vrin the support 
of the subordinate commanders in IV Corps. 
In the ultimate plan, Co 
' 
would be sent ,,'lith J GS orders to take command of the 7th Division in 
My Tho on the day before the coup began; he would order all boats to the 
Saigon side of the l1ekong River; and, thus, act as a blocking force to 
General Cao .. rho, stranded in Can 'l'ho on the far side of the Helwng, 
would then be arrested by dissident officers in his o'l-m command. 
Co 
apparently was successful in getting the support of the great majority 
of the subordinate officers, but one loyal officer heard of the plans 
and immediately tipped off Nhu. 
Diem and l';hu called in Dinh and revealed what they had l earned , 
attempting to force his hand. 
Dinh reacted 'I-;i th feigned shock and 
suggested that Co be executed immediately. 
This convinced Fhu that. 
Dinh ,\-1as not involved. 
They preferred to keep Co alive to get more 
information from him. 
Nhu then revealed his mill elaborate scheme for 
a pseudo-coup that vlOuld pre-empt the plotters and squelch tlleir plans. 
His hlO~part plan was to start with the transfer of Colonel Tung , s 
special forces out of Saigon on maneuvers. 
The phony coup vwuld then 
take place with Diem and I~hu escaping to their hideavTaY at Cap st Jacques . 
After several days of hooliganism including the murder of sevel'al promi-
nent Vietnamese and some Americans, the l oyal 5th Division under Dinh 
and the 7th under Cao \wuld counterattacll:. the city and Diem and Nhu would 
return as triumphant heroes, more secure than ever . 
Dinh vTaS the key 
to J'Thu's plan. 
Dinh's role becomes confused at this point. 
He apparently was 
uncertain about the relative balance of forces and decided to cooperate 
with both sides until he could decide .. rhich he felt was going to gain 
the upper hand, although he VTaS proba,bly still leaning tovTard the palace. 
TOP SECPJi,T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP Sl~CHET - Sensitive 
In any cas e, if he I'Tas tru.st cd 
generals because they confided 
the operation, and l~hu ' s plan, 
role, ne er came to fruition. 
generals had been plotting. 
by the Elms, he certainly Ims not by tbe 
in him none of their detailed plans for 
in vlhich he would have played the )\:e;y' 
It vas pre··empted by the real coup the 
By the last w'eek in Oc-(.olJer, timing hB.d become critical. 
The Thao 
group apparently had intended to act on October 2)+, but ,,-Tere dissuaded 
by Don and Khiem who argu.ed that they had too fe"r forces to guarant,ee 
StlCCess. ~/ 
It Ims at this juncture that Khiem brought i..he Thao grony 
into the plans anJ worked out joint arrangements Idth them for the 
execution of t.he coup. 
Sbaplen says the.t tl,e generals' coup i';as 
orginally planned for november 4. 
Th:i S c-1nflicts, hovever , with \>'hat 
Don had told Conein on Oc"i.,ober 2Lf, namely that it '.;Qul,l occur before 
November 2. 21 
By Shaplen! s accomrL, Dinh revealed the planned date 
of' the coup to hhu 1>,ho instructed him to urge that it be advance:t to 
Eovember 1. 6/ Phu still t.h01.1ght somehmr he could carry off hi s plan 
by abandoning the phony COUI),' by letting tJle real one substitute for 
it in the hope that it vlOuld be thro'\w off balaflce by the advanced. d2ote, 
and by relying on Dinb's loyal troops as supplemented by Cao's to tip 
the scale in the family's favor once the chips were dovm. 
In allmdng 
the generals to mB_ke their move, t11e principal rebels 1>~ould all be com-
promised and Nhu could then act to crush all major dissidence. 
Ilhatever 
'(,he reason, yhether by Lbu ' s intr:i gue or by their Ulm timetc:.ble, the 
generals set the coup for Hovember 1. 
While they had left a ,vorr led U. S. officialdom with only s~.etchy 
ideas of the plam1ed operation, the generals had themselves devoted 
great attention to all details of their move. 
1i!hen the hour came for 
execution, the plan was implemented vTith haTdly a hitch, and the fate 
of the reg:iJne ,ms sealed in the first hours of the coup. 
On October 29, the first preparatory action for a coup was t.aken. 
General Dinh ordered Colonel TUJ1g to move his special forces out of the 
capital for maneuvers, but whether he 'vas acting as the agent of the 
generals or the palace is still tlJ1clear. 
Simultaneously, the chief of 
intelligence, who had been a member of the Thao plot and was nOH parti-
cipating in the generals ! plan, passed phony intelligence of a VC 
build-up outside Saigon to Diem and Nhu to get them to divert loyal 
units that could have been used to thwart a coup. 
The day of the coup itself began improbably vlith an official 
U. S. call on Diem. 
Acl.miral Ji'elt , CTI'TCPAC, had been visiting General 
Harkins to revievi the situ2,tion and prior to his departure at noon, 
he and IJodge paid a courtesy call on the Presid.ent. 
Diem! s monologue 
was little different from vThat he had said to },Ic:':81nara and Taylor the 
month before. 
As tl1ey i'!ere leaving, hmiever , he called Lodge as:i de and 
they talked priv'ately for twenty minvtes. 
Diem, in a tragically unwitting 
example of too little too late, indicated tl1at he yanted to t8.U\: to Lodge 
55 
1'OP Si!:CRl~T .. Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
sometirae about ",bat it i"iaS the U. S. wanted him to do. 7/ 
The atmosphere 
of t.l':!is meeting must have been strained in the extreme'-'in view of Lodge's 
aivareness of the inrrninence of the COD,p. 
After the meeting, Felt "lent 
straight to the airport and. held a press conference, ,'lith a nervous 
General Don at his side, before departing at noon unai·mre of the drcuna 
that "ros already unfolding. 
1'lhile Lodge and Felt had been at the palace, coup UIlitS had 8,lready 
begun to deploy in and around Saigon. 
At the S81ile time, nearly all the 
generals and. top offieeTs had been convened for a noon meeting at JCS 
headquarters at Tan Son l:hut. 
TheTe the coup commit tee informed them 
that the coup had begucl and asked for their support. 
Pledges of support 
were recorded on tape by all those present "I~Tho s'l['pported the action. 
They \~ere to be used later over the radio and '.-muld implicate the entire 
senior officer corps of the Army in the event the conp failed. 
1.11 this 
way the plotters "I{ere able to enlist the support of several wavering 
officers. 
The only senior officers not present \'1ere Generals Dinl1 6nd Ce.o, 
who were not. informed of the meeting to prevent their revealing the coup 
prematurely to the palace or taJdng cO'lwter action. 
Also not present ~'as 
the South Viet.n8.1llese Chief of Naval Operations, vrho had been assassinated 
by a "trigger-happy escort enroute. 
Several officers suspected of being 
loyal to Diem were taken into immediate custody at JGS, including Colonel 
Tung, and the commanders of the Air Force, the airborne brigade, the 
Earines, the Civil Guard., and the police force. 
A CAS officer, pre·-
sumably Lt Colonel Conein, 'I:as also invited to come to JGS and was 
authorJzed to maintain telephone contact vdth the Embassy during the 
coup. 
}Ie provided reliable reporting throughout the next two days. 
At 1:45 p.m., Don called General StilvTell, Harkins ' J-3, and informed. 
him that all the generals were assembled at JGS and that the coup had 
begun. F}) 
At the same time, coup forces 'Here seizing the post office 
'(lith its telecOllllilunicat.ions facilities, the police headquarters, the 
r adio stations , the airport , and the naval headci.uarters, and were deploy-
i ng i n positions to assault the special forces headquarters near Tan 
Son J'Thut , the palace, and the barracks of the palace guard. 
Other units 
had been deployed in blocking positions to defend aga.inst any l oya:!, 
counterattack from uni ts outside Saigon. 
These actions were s,-lift and 
met with little r esistance. 
The units i nvol ved i ncl uded the n:arine and 
airborne units under the l eadership of jlmior offi cers, the Air Force 
under junior officers, and 'uui ts from the 5th Di visi on under orders from 
Dinh, who had thrown i n his lot ",hen he became a"l",-are of the unanimity of 
t he senior officers and their annarent l ikel ihood of success . 
Later i n 
t he day , armor ~md troops from t11e 7th Di v i s i on at My The , illlder the 
i nsurgent l eadership of Colonel Co , arri ved f or the assaul t on the palace . 
As is al ways the case i n this kind of crisis, tbe quantity of cabl es 
qui ckly overwhelmed the communications system, and the incompleteness of 
t he r eports meant tha.t no clear picture of "That 1-raS happening could be 
pieced together tmtil later . 
As i n all such si tuations , the }~iliassy 
became an i sland l inl<.:ed to outside events onl y by tenuous r eports from 
t el ephone contacts. 
TOP b?CRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP S:CCRKC - Sensitive 
In the early afternoon, Colo1;el 1'U.llg) \lTho had been arres ted on the 
morning of J',ovember 1, '\'laS forced to call his special forces and tell 
t hem to surl"ender to the coup forces. 
Fot l ong thereaf'ter, the adjacent 
special forces hea:iqlJarters fell to the coup units after a brief skir .. 
mish. 
I"1hen this occurred, the palace "Tas reduced for i ts defense to 
the palace guard, since the remainder of the special forces were outside 
t he city and effectively cut off from it, and all other unit commanders 
had come under the cormua,nd of officers involved in the coup. 
General Cs.o, 
t he IV Corps c::)lmnander, pledged hi s support to the coup in the l ate after-· 
noon, although it is not clear whether this was opportLmistic or whether 
he thought the coup I·tas recdly Phase I of I:hu I s plan. 
Eot trusting him, 
hovrever, the [,;enerals placed him under guard. 
At it: 30 p.m. , the generals 
went on tbe radio to announce the coup and demand the resignation of Diem 
and F.hu.~./ 
This ;;·ras follm"ed by a continuine; broadcast of the pledges 
of support of the senior officers 'Lhat had been recorded that morning. 
l1eamlhile, Air rorce transports ';Tere dropping prepared l eaflets announc .. 
ing the coup, and calling on the populs.ce to support it . 
At the beginning, Diem and hhu "rere apparently fooled by the cou.P, 
or he.d completely miscalculated the extent of its support. At the first 
indicati ons of coup actions, Phu reportedly assured an al armeJ. offi.cial 
tha,t it 1;Tas all a part of a palace plan . 10/ 
vlben "wrd r eached the 
palace that all key points had fallen, l\:hutried to contact General Dinh. 
IIThen he coul d not re8.ch him, he realized. that be had been out.foxed and 
t hat the coup I-laS genuine. 
By thi s time , fighting "Tas goi ng 0!.1 between 
the coup forces and the paJace guard at the palace and the nearby guard 
barracks. 
I'Then the generals called the t"lVO brothers and asked them to 
surrender , promising t hem safe conduct, out of 1-,11e couXltry, Diem replied 
by asking t hem to come to the palace for 
I I consultations , II an obv j ous 
attempt to repeat the 1960 t actic of delaying the coup long enough for 
l oyal troops to reach the city. 
The generals, hOl'lever , I'Tere not bar-
gaining - - they iv-ere demanding . 
At it: 30 p. m. , Diem called Lodge to ask where he stood and the follm-7-
i ng conversation ensued: 
Diem: 
Some units have made a rebellion and I want to knm-T "That 
. is the at·l:.itude of the US? 
Lodge: I do not f eel I-rell enough i nformed to be able to t ell you. 
I have heard the sbootjng, but am not acquainted I'i"ith all 
the facts. 
Also it is ~:30 a .m. in \'Jashi ngton and the US 
Government cannot possibly have a view. 
Diem: 
But you must have some general ideas. After all, I am 
a Chief of state. 
I have tried to do my duty . 
I want 
to do nov what duty and good sense reqlLi.re . 
I believe 
in duty above all. 
5'7 
TOP SECR~T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TO:? SJ::C:8.ET ,- Sensitive 
Lodge: 
You have cel~tainly done your duty'. 
As I told you only 
this mornjng, I admire your courage and your great 
contr" butions to your C()Ull'~ry. 
Fo one can take a~·:ay 
from you the credit for all you hewe dOlle. 
HOvT I 
aln 
v:orried about your physj c:al safety. 
I have a report 
that those in charge of the current activity offer you 
cmd your brother safe conduct out of the country if 
you resign. 
liad you lleard this? 
Diem: 
1·'10. 
Ulnd then after a pause) 
You have my telephone 
number. 
Lodge: 
Yes. 
If I can do anything for your physical safety, 
ples_se call me. 
Diem: 
I am trying to re-establish order. 11/ 
There is no evidence availab1 e as to 'whether ~"iashington issued further 
instl'lwtions vlith respect to the personal safet.y of Dic:m and lihu at this 
time. 12/ 
The above conversation I'TaS the last that alW iJlleric8.n had 
vith Diem. 
lJOdge, as was h:Ls custom, retifed thc_t night at. about 9: 30 
p.m. 13/ 
Shortly after Diem I s call to 110dge, the gen.erals called the palace 
again and put Colonel Tung on the phone. 
Tung told Ehu he had sur--
rendered. 
Tl1e generals then demanded the immediate surrender of tbe 
brothers or tbey \wuld put t.he palace under air and grou..n.d at.tack. 
~ach 
general at JGS, in turn, ",!as put on the phone to assure Diem of safe con-
duct if he would resign, but l~hu apparently dissnacled him. Iif/ General lliinh 
himself made a separate t.elephone caJl to Diem in a final attempt to get 
him to surrender, but Diem hung up. 15/ 
The tlvO brothers nov! began 
frantically calling unit commanders throughout the country on thejr pri-
vate cOllull1.mico.,tions system to get them to come to their aid . 
In most 
cases t.hey could. not. get tbrough, and. vThen they did they vrere told to 
surrender by officers who nO':T supported the coup. 
\'Then they could get 
no help from the rcgulcr military, they ma,Je a vain effort to enlist the 
support of paramili t.ary u.n.i ts and t.hej.r Republic youth groups . 
Sometime 
in the early evening~ probably by eight o ' clock, they recognized the 
hopelessness of the situation and esca'f)ed. from the palace, u_Dbelmown to 
i ts defenders , tbrough one of the secret u_l1derground exits connected 
to the sewer system. 
They v,ere met 'by a Chinese friend \v-ho took them 
to his home in Cholon \There they had previously set up a communications 
channel to the palace for just such an emergency. 
There they spent 
their l ast night. 
In the face of the brothers ' i ntransigent refusal to surrender and 
confident· that they lv-ere nov; in control of the entire cODl1try and that 
58 
TOP m~CHET - Sensj ti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
their plans had succeeded, the generals began assembling forces and pre-
paring for the siege of the palace. 
At about. nine o'clock, they opened 
an artillery barrage of the palace and its defenders. 
Since the :nalace 
\'Jas being defended by some tanks, ari infantry assault vTith ta.nk suppor'f, 
"TaS required to captuTe it. 
~.'his began about 3: 30 a.m. on IToverlber 2, 
and lasted until about 6:30 a.m., "Then the palace fell, aft.er Diem he.d 
iss'ned a cease-fire order to the palace guard from his Cholon hidem,ray. 
Throughout t.he night the brothers had remained in contact with both 
their loyal supporters at the l')alace, and periodically "d. tll the inslJ.r·-
gents. 
The latter did not learn tbat the brothers had fled 1.mtil the 
rebel forces under Colonel Trlao invaded the palace. 
At 6:20 a.m., Diem 
called J'CS and spoke personally \V':i.th General Don, offering to surrender 
i n exchange for a guarantee of safe cO!1duct to tbe air:nort and departure 
from Vietnmn. 16/ 
Hinh agreed to these terms, bu.t Diem did not reveal 
his \V'hereabouts, still apparently uXlable to grasp the new realities. 
Colonel Thao learned of the location of the hidea,,'8,y from a captu.red 
officer of the palace guard and received permission from Yinh to go 
there and get the bro'Lhers. 
T.ihen he arrived e;t the house, he telephoned 
again to headquarters 'Lo report his location and vTaS overheard by the 
brothers on a.rlOther extension. 
They escaped to a nearby Catholic church, 
where once ag&'in Diem called Ceneral Don at 6:50 a.m. and surrendered 
unconditionally. 17/ 
He and rhu were ta.'ken prisoner shortly ~(,herea,fter 
by General Lai :1:uuXuan, a long time enemy, "Tho according to most accounts 
ordered or permitted their murder in the back of an armored personnel 
carrier enroute to JCS headquarters. }!}) 
The state Department reacted to ne'l{S of the coup in terms of the 
recognition problem 'Ivith respect to t.lJe new' government. 
Rusk felt tha,t 
a delay "TOuld be useful to the generals i n not appearing to be U. S. 
agents or stooges and v:auld assist us in our public si:.ance of noncom .. 
plicity. 19/ 
He further discouraged any large delegation of the generals 
from calling on Lodge as if they 't7ere "reporting in. II 
A subsequent' 
message stressed the need to underscore publicly the fact that this ,as 
not so much a coup as an expression of nat i onal will, a fact r evealed by 
the near unanimous support of important military and civilian leaders. 20/ 
It further stressed the importance of Vice President Tho to a quick return 
to constitutional government and the need, therefore, for t he generals to 
i nclude him in any interim I' egiroe. 
Lodge replied affirmatively to these 
vie\vs, indicating his opinion that vie should encourage other friendly 
countries to recognize the nelV' government first ,vi th the assu:rance that 
the U. S. \-Tould follovT suit shortly. 21/ 
Further, we should ShOll our 
friendly support for the regime and \dthout fanfare resume payments i n 
the c~~ercial L~port program. 
The news of the brutal and seemingly pointless murder of Diem and 
Nhu, hov:ever, was received in ;'!asbington vlith shock and disma~T. ~/ 
President Kennedy vTas reportedly personally stunned at the ne\\'s, par-
ticularly in view of the heavy U,S. involvement in encouraging tbe coup 
59 
TOP Sk'CEV;T - Sensitive 
------~-
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP 
SEC~1I:::[I' - Sensitive 
leaders. 23/ 
Apparently, '\',e had put. full confidence i n the coull com" 
mitt.ee's offers of safe conduct to the brothers and, reluctant t.o inter·~ 
cede on behalf of Diem arId Lhu f'or fear of appearing to offer sli:pport. 
to them or of reneging on OUT pledges of non-·interference to the generals, 
we had not appreciated the degree of hatred of the lI;go faraily among the 
generals, nor their fear that if the brothers survived the coup they 
i'TOuld somehovt, sometime stage a comeback. 
In their first meeting "lith 
Lodge after the coup, hm·rever, the generals denied that. the assassination 
had been ordered, and promised to make public their offer of' safe conduct 
to Die.m jf he ''lOuld resign .. ?!:./ 
Hhile the callousness of the murde:cs of Diem and Thu, their previous 
represni-l;eness not\lithst.anding, horrified tlle ,:orld, the succers of tbe 
coup and t.l1e deaths of' the ho.ted brothers were greet.ed with popular jubi-
l ation in South Vietno.m. 
Spontaneous street demonstrations by stUdents 
i n a holiday mood ended in the btTn ing of the offices of the Tuaes of 
Vietnam and the destruction of a statue modeled after i'-:;:rne. Elm. 
~he­
tension released set off celebrations rivaled only by the annual Tet 
new Year 
fes'Livities. 
,A.illerjcaJ.ls were greeted and received Yl1th great 
enthusiasm, and Lodge "ms widely regarded as the hero of tbe vihole train 
of events. 
Vietnamese v;ere heard to remark that if an election for 
president i\'ere held Lodge would 1t'in by a l andslide. 25/ 
'l'hus, the nine·-year rule of rigo Dinh Diem came to a sudden, bloody, 
and permanent end, and U. S. policy in Vietnam pl unged into the unknoym , 
our complicity in the coup only heightening our responsibilities and our 
commitment in tl'Jis struggling, leaderless l and. 
~'~e could be certain only 
that YJhatever nev,T l eadership emerged 'I.;Quld be fragile , untried, and 
unt.est.ed. 
2 . 
Establishment of an Inter:im Hegime 
Even before the i nitiation of the coup, the coup committee through 
General Kim had been in touch ylith civilian political oppositionists and 
to some extent with members of Diem ' s government. 
Once the success of 
the coup vias certain, negoti ations Y.Tith these civilians by t he generals ' 
committee began i n earnest. 
On the night of Yovember 1 and the follo,,;-
i ug day, all mi nisters of Diem ' s government were told to submit their 
r esignations and did so, some on U.S. advice. 
11:0 r epri sals "rere t a..'k:en 
against them. 
Indeed, Vice President 'l:'ho entered i nto intensive nego-
tiat ions vTi th General I'linh on rovember 2 on the composition of the in·-
terim government . 
He apparently understood the eagerness of the generals 
t o have 11im heB.d a ne'l'/ government to provide continuity, and he used this 
knOldedge to bargain with t hem about the composition of the cabinet . 
He 
was not to be t heir pliant tool. 
\'ihil e these conferences "Tere taking pl ace, the coup commit tee , or 
ItRevolutionary Committee" as it '1mB nOyT calling i tsel f , distributed 
l eaflets and press releases announcing the dissolution of the l'(ational 
60 
TOP SECRET 
~ Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
'rOP SEC:;:;:;:::I' .. Sensi ti ve 
Assembl;y and the abolition of the Diem··:')hu government lJased on the _COD-· __ 
_ 
stitution of 1956, and proclaiming the support of the connnHtee for such 
democratic principler: as free elections, unhampered political oppos i tioD , 
freedom of press, freedom of religion, and an end to discrimination. 26/ 
'.rhey were at pains to eXl)lain that t.he purpose of the coup ,·ras to bolster 
tbe fight against the Comm<.mists vlhich they pledge themselvcf3 to pt,rsue 
"lith renevled. vigor an.d determination. 
On the afternoon of november 3, the second day af·ter the coup, 
Generals Don and Ki.m called on L.odge at the J:mbassy, explaining that 
General l'·1inh was tied up in conversatio[ls vtith Vi ce President Tho on the 
neVi government . 27/ 
The conversation \"'8S long and touched on many topics. 
It began vrith mutual expressions of satisfaction at the success of the 
coup, and continued "\'lith Lodge's ansurance of forthcoming U. S. recognition 
for their new government. 
The generals explained tl1C.t tbey had decided 
on a tlfO-tiel'cd gov-ernment strllCture w':Lth a military commJ ttee presided 
over by General Einh overseeing a regular cabinet that vwuld be mostly 
civilian ,\'it,h Tho as prime minister. 
Lodge promised to see to tbe im" 
mediate restorat:Lon of certain of' the ald programs and. the Sl)eedy res1:unp-
tioD of the otl1ers 'when the government 1"as in place. 
Tbey then dealt 
with a host of ilmnediate problems including tl1e r et urn of' tbe :,)hu chil'
A 
dren t.o their mother and the disposition of the rest of the :t>:go family, 
press censorship, the release of '1'ri Quang from the fmbassy, curfey, 
reprisals against former ministers, etc. 
The general s confirmed the 
psychological importance of the cOIlIffiodl ty import suspension to the suc-
cess of their plans. 
Lodc;e \TaS elated , both at tbe efficiency and 
success of the coup, and the seriousness and determination of the general s 
to deal vlith the pressing problems and get on wi ttl the I·lar. 
The foll owing day, on i nstruction s from T"l as hington , Lodae, in company 
with JJt Colonel Conein, met vlith Genera.ls l'Hnh and Don. 28/ 
1/ashi ngton 
had been anxious for LOige to urgently convey to the gen"erals the neei 
to make a clarifying statement about the deaths of t he brothers and to 
take steps to i nsure humane t reatment of other members of the family. 
The generals "T~re responsive to Lodge ' s urgings and promised to see that 
action I,ras taken on the U. S. requests. 
I,'iinh said that the ccm:pos i t i on of 
the new govermnent woul d be annom1cecl shortly. 
I n describing the meet:Lng 
later , Lodge offered a prophetic description of t,Iinh: 
"Minh seemed tired 
and somewhat fra.zzled; obviously a good , v.Tell-intentioned man . 
i'7ill he 
be strong enol.1gh to get on top of things?"?:2/ 
Lodge closed the cable 
by taking exception to State ' s excessive pre-occupation with the negati ve 
public relations problems of the coup and decrying its f ailure to note 
the brilliance vlith which the coup vias planned and executed . 
The promised 8.lmounce.ment of the nel, gov'ernment carne on tbe morning 
of Hovem1er 5. 
I t vTaS very much as General Kim had described it to Lodge 
on November 3. 
Minh FB.S named President and Chief of the .r~ilitary 
COImlli ttee ; Tho ,ms listed as Premier , !,unister of Economy, ani Idnister 
61 
TOP SECRt:'i' - Sensiti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SJ':CRET - Sensitive 
of Finance; Don \{8.8 rWilled. lIinister of Defense; and. General Dinh 'was named 
to the j'linistry of Security (Interior). 30/ 
Only one other general ,ms- -
incl uded in the cabinet o.f fifteen I;Thichwas com!.)osed. primarily of 
bureaucrats and civilians \'Titb no previous eX];lerience. 
Political 
figures, either opposed to Diem or not, "Jere conspicuously absent from 
the cabinet, a fact 'which "I-lQuld impair the ne,,; government f s seclll'ing the 
roots in popular support it ,-lQuld need in the l ong run. 
The announcement 
of the ne"l',' cabinet "ras followed by the release of IIProvisional Constitu-
tional Act Eo. 1, If signed by General 1.Unh, formally suspending the 1956 
constitution 8_nd outlining the structure and functions of the :interim 
government. 31/ 
On Eovember 6, Saigon radio 
nn01.mced the composition 
of the ExecutIve Committee of the IHlitary Revolutionary Council. 
l\:inh 
"lvas Chairman, Don and Dinh v:ere Deputy Chairmen, and nine other senior 
generals, inclucling Kim., Khi.em, '11ittle" l'linb, Chieu, and Thieu v;ere mem-
bers. 
Significantly, General Khanh ,,:as not. 
On October 5, the new Foreign Minister had sent a note to the Embassy 
informing the J\mbassador officially of the change of government, and 
expressing the hope that relations between the tl'iO c01.m-Lries \{Quld be 
continued and strengthened. 32/ 
State approved IJod.ge f s proposed reply 
of recognition the follOl'lingday, l:ovember 6, and, under the pressu.re of 
other governments and the press, announced it.s intention to recognize 
on fovember 7 in Hashington. ill 
The note of recognition was delivered 
on l'ovember 8, ,,:hen LoJge called on the ne,,! Foreign j'.Iinist.er, Pham Dang 
Lam. 34/ 
IJam, emphasizing his OvTD insufficiencies for the job he had 
been given, asked for 1,0:3. ge f s advice "lhich Lodge was apparently not 
re l uct-ani, to give on a variety of topics . 
The prim8.ry impression left 
was that the neH government would be heavily dependent. on 1.' . S. advice 
and support, not only for the vmr effort, but also in the practice_l prob-
l ems of running the country. 
In the fj rst three vTeel\s of Jlovember 1963, three problems pre-
occupied most Americans and Vietnamese in the nelV pol itical and military 
sitva tion created by the coup. 
The first of these l'laS getting the neY! 
government started, developing the re l ations beh;reen the new Vietnamese 
officials and their American counter:par,ts, and. most importantly shaking 
down the po"wer relationships ",ithin the nevI regime . 35/ 
The first tvm 
aspects of this problem ,<TQuld be self-resolving and were l argely a matter 
of ti1l1e. 
":lith r espect to the latter, it was clear from the outset that 
General 1,'llnh was the domi nant figure in the new government and "\las so 
r egarded by nearl y all the military men. 
Tho, however, had exhibited 
considerable independence during the negotiations over the cabinet, 
r eflecting his confidence that the generals fe l t they needed him. 
The 
open question , then, was what degree of freedom of action the nevT cabinet 
under Tho ,{Quld have, or alternatively , hOl-T deeply the mil itary councj.l 
i nt.ended to involve itself i n run.ning the cOlmtry. 
':I.'his i ssue v:as not 
resolved in the public statements and communiques of the new regime and 
ambiguity on the subject ioTas clearly reflected in the lack of decisive-
ness and vigor of the new ministers and in their general uncertainty as 
62 
TOP SBCln~T 
'Q Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
to tl1eir authority. 
Hhile the exac··: reE-sons for not including any poli tj ~ • 
cians in the cabinet. are not knm'iD, it is reasonable to assu.'l1e that neither 
Tho nor the military were anxioLJ.s tc see potential political rivals , with 
pOvrer deriving from popular support ~ in positions to chaLLenge the 
authority of 'Lhe ne,-: leaders. 
'11bat c'ter tte case , it 'I'laS the irrefwlution 
of the pouer relationship wit-bin t~e ne:" goverr;ment that vTas one of the 
factors contributing t.o the next 1'0:.:1 of coup-maldng in J'anuary 1961.f. 
The second urgent problem of t:',ese first \'leeks in ];ovem"oer \'TaS the 
rapidly deteriorating economic sitv:'io0. in Vietnalll. 
The situation had 
been serious 1n September, and 8, l:::.::';e deficit for the 196~ budget had 
already been forecast. 
The suspensi.on of the commercial import payments 
and selected PL l.f80 had aggravated '::-:e situation during September o.nd 
October. 
Furt.hermore, all negotip.t ':':>ns on tlle 19S~ budget levels and U. S 
support had been suspended and were ::0',1 serio:.lsly behind schedule. 
./.l,.vmre 
of the urgency of the problem, Sta.t e, 0:1 ~'.ovember 2, had asl\:ed for Lodge ' s 
reC01J1Illendations on the resumption 0::' aid. and had urged hj]ll to identify the 
people responsible for econo~ic pl8.'·.'·~.i.r:g in the neli' government so that 
negotiations could begin imnlediatel~:. 36/ 
Concern \.;as also expressed 
at the lack of expertise in this areB. auong the generals and LoJge was 
advised to encourage t.hem to mal~e rr.exlrc.nn use of econom.ists in the 
previons govcl'rJIDent I'Tho were farllilL::r .vi th the problems. 
Lodge prOpOReo. 
in response that the government. be 2..,kei to name a high level conuilissioll 
of economic experts to work with a similar group from the U. S. IHssion. 3
r
{ / 
Thj s suggestion h8.d, been agreed to i~l priEciple the previous day by Tho, 
through whose office all economic a:'..-l r::e.tters ;iere to be cha,nLelcd. 38/ 
Lodge also believed that our aid sL::>'J.ld 'be incree.sed as an indication of 
our support for tbe new goverJ1lnent. 39/ 
nut beyond these preliminary 
discussions, no real progress was rr:e.le on the economic probl ems before 
the Honolulu'Conference on November 20. 
The third problem that viorried .-'..mericans '\-I'as the heightened level of 
Viet Cong activity in the wake of t:-,e coup and the military dislocations 
caused by i t. Related, but of even TIore importance , Fas the ne'Yi infor-
mation that came to light after the coup and ill the atmospher e of free 
discussion that i t generated sho'Yd.r:~ that the military situati on Vlas 
far worse than \i'e had believe,i . 
The overall statisti cal indicators had 
nOVI begun to' ShovT deteriora,tion dat=-~,g back to the s·ummer . 
The i nci dence 
of VC attacks \vas up over the first six months of 1963, the \·reapons l oss 
r atio had ,vorsened and the rate of '::; defections \-las ','ray dOWIl . 40/ 
In the immediate vlake of the coup, "'-:; activity had j 'LJJnped dramati cal ly 
as MACV had feared i t vTould and the:ce vTas great concern t o r eturn uni ts 
participating i n the coup to the field Quickly to forestall any major 
Communist offensi ve . Lfl/ 
Cause for more fundamental concern , hO'lvever , 
vlere t he first rumorsand i ndicatioLs that under Diem there had been 
r egular and substantial fals i ficatio:l in the mi lita.ry reporting I'ystem 
and i n r eport i ng on. the strategic hc-.J.lets that had badly distorted the 
r eal military situation in Vietnam to lL5.ke it appear l ess serious than i t was. 
TOP SECnE'l' - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
. TOP 
Sl~CB.E'I 
Sensitive 
This , it turned out, lVas the main rEC.son for the previous discrepancies 
in Nl"..CV and D. S. )ilission evaluatior:s of the war. 
In the first flush of 
self-satisfactj on after the coup, Lei ze had predicted that the change 
of regime v,ould shorten the ,,:ar bec5..lse of the improved mOTe.le of the 
lillVL troops. 112/ 
:i3ut as time vlOre o~'l, the accun;ulating evidence of 
the gravity oftbe military situatio:::. displaced these sanguLl.e prog.· 
noses. 
The only comforting note in the intelligence Ivas the apparent dis~ 
comfiture of the j\~ational IJiberatior:. lront. 
Throughout the summer and 
fall, the JiJLF had seemingly been ufl5.·ule to capitalize on the 3uddhist 
or student struggle movements. 
In fe.ct ~ its principal respor:se to the 
Diem-ulJ:idhist clash ha:i been increas:".nt::ly vituperative attad:s on the 
D. S. 
hot tmtj.l j;ofclllber 7th did the ~'Ll.-;> issue a post~Diern policy state" 
ment, consisting of a list of "eieht demands": .!2/ 
(1) 
Destroy all strategic i!e.mlets . .. and other disguised camps. 
( 2 ) 
Helease all political detainees .•.. 
(3) 
Promulgate without dele.y democratic freedom .... 
(4) 
Roo.t out all vestiges of the fascist and m'lite.rist dic-
K 
tatorial regime. 
( 5) 
Stop all persecution 2.l.:i repression and raiding operations. 
(6) 
Dissolve all nepotist organizaU.ons ..• . 
( 7) 
Immediately stop forcible conscription .... 
(8) 
Cancel all kinds of unjustified taxes. 
The Duong Van Minh government could claim that it I'!aS in the process of 
meeting all of -Lhese Ildemands Tl exce]?:. one _.- halting the draft _ .. so that 
the rLF ivas effectively pre-empted. 
On r ovember 17, the ELF Central 
Committee issued another series of demands: 
( 1) 
Eliminate the vestiges of the Diem regime . 
(2) 
Establish democratic freedom. 
(3) 
Eliminate Ameri can influence. 
(4) 
Hake social and economic reforms. 
(5) 
Balt the fighting. 
(6) 
EstabUsh a coalition govermnent. 
64 
TOP SJi:CHI:T - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
To:e 
s~c~Cm~l' - Sensitive 
The demands "Tere accompal1ied by a statement affirming the relmification 
of Vietnam as a goal of the rLl" ~ the first such statement in over tl<!O 
years. 
Douglas l)ike! s analysis vas Mable to resolve the reasons for 
tbe inaction of the ITlJI' throughout the crisis: 
Had the llL}i' leadership 'wished to do so, it could luwe 
used its iInpressi ve struggle machine to IB:LlllCh i.n the name 
of the Buddha a nation-\Tide strugg1e movement Ulat con-
ceivably could have ended .-lith its long-pursued General 
Uprising .•• Knowledgeable Vietnamese attributed its refu::;al 
to act to an umrillingness to involve itself in an alien 
struggle move:m,ent. 
~l'he l~LF and the communists, ran the 
argl)ltlent, avoid ac:tjvi-Lies over vrhich they do not exercise 
total cont,rol. ... Tl"Je Buddhist leadership made it clear it 
did not seek nLF hel]? since it wisl!ed at all costs to avoid 
the Communist stigrna. 
A110ther popular explanation for the 
JTLF! S 
n sit.-tight tI policy during the Buddhist troubles ",-as 
that the ELF vas going to allov7 the bourgeois revolutionary 
forces to succeed in toppling Diem, after which it would 
capture t.he Hevolution as the Kerensky Government was cap-
t ured in the Rus sian Hevolntion. 
Wo such effort, hOl'rever, 
vTaS made by the rLF. 
A slanderous but Iddely bandied 
explanation among Vie"Lnamese at; the time vTaS that the l'ILF 
did not want Diem removed, that he and his brothers and 
sist.er-in-l aw "rere far more valuable to the FLF in office 
than out. 
In truth, the FLF posture during this period 
remains something of a mystery. ~}+/ 
3. 
The Honolulu Conference and Jl:S)1,.M 27~ 
Having postponed his planned October 31 visit to I"ashington because 
of the irn.:minence of the coup; Lodge apparently suggested, i n r esponse to 
a state query, that it be rescheduled for Iiovember 10. 
Husk proposed a 
further postpollement to insure time for Lodge to establish ",-orking rela-
tions ,·ri th the nelv government and to take advantage of hi s olm planned 
trip to Tokyo later in the month. L14/ 
Accordingly, a meeting with Husk , 
Bundy, Bell, l-icHamara, and Taylor Tn rlonolulu was scheduled on I;ovember 20 
for the entire country tea.m. 
Lodge \v2"s invited to proceed on to I'Te.shing-
ton after the meeting if he felt he needed to te,lk Ivith the President. 
In preparation for the conference , Ste,te dispatched a long series 
of' specific questions to Lodge on possible methods of broadening the 
political base of support of the new government and i ncreasing the effec" 
tiveness of the ,qar effort. L16/ 
This viaS additional to the comprehen-
sive r eview of the situation-,-including an evaluation of progress on the 
14d:a.mara··Taylor recolmnendations, that the military lias expected to provide 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
':f'OP 
St~CRzr - Sensitive 
and the in-depth assessment of the nevr regime and its prospects by the 
country temu. lj7 / 
Lodg~ replied even before arriving at., the conference 
that the proposed discussions vTOuld require detailed information about 
the functioninc of the new rulers '>Thich it i\aS far too early to obta;in. ~8/ 
In a broad overvie,·,' of the new political situation in Vietnal1l at 
the plenary session in Honolulu, l,odge voiced his optilnism about the 
actions taken thus far by the new' government. to consolIdate its popular 
support. 49/ In particular, he noted the efforts to eliminate forced 
l abor in the strategic ha:m.lets, to cmtail arbitrary arrests, to deal 
vii th extortion and corruption, to enlist the support of the Hoa Hao and 
Cao Dai sects, and to consolidate and strengthen the strategic hmnlet 
program. 
But, he left no doubt tbat the nel{ leadership vTas inexperienced 
and fragile. 
For this reason:J he urged the conferees not to press too 
much on the government too soon, either in tbe lI'e.y of military and eco-
nomic programs, or steps to democratize and constitutionalize the country. 
His second major point \-;as the psychological a.nd poli tica.l, as \'Tell as 
. 
economic, need for ll. S. aid to the ne" government in at least the amount 
of our aid to Diem, and preferably more. 
lIe recognized the domestic 
poli tical problems in the U. S. with Congress, but he argued that anything 
l ess vlOuld be a severe blow to the new rulers \,ho i{ere still getting their 
bearings. 
USOf,1 Director Brent supported these latter vie\\Ts, but registered 
his concern about the naivete of the nei>T leaders in tbe face of an ex··· 
tremely grave economic situation. 50/ 
In response to a direct question 
from Rush: as to whether an increase"in dollars \\Tould sborten the \'lar, 
Lodge demurred some,'That and replicd that wbat "m~ required was greater 
motivation. 51/ 
NcI'Tamara immediately disagreed, saying that his uYlder-
standillg of the piaster deficit problem vTaS that it ,vas endanger inc all 
the programs, and that both AID and ),J.:'\.P \~ere in need of increased. funding. 
Concurring in this vie"r, AID Administrator Bell agreed to revie\'! the 
entire AID program. 
General Harkins I assessment of the military situation took llote of 
the upsurge of Viet Cong activity in the '>Teek follovring the coup} but 
i n general remained optimistic, although more guardedly than in the past. 52/ 
The sharp increase in VC attacks after the coup seemed to have been 
haphaza.:rd, and not part of a v{ell coordinated country-\·,ide response to 
t he uncertain political situation. 
And in the vreek just ended, activity 
had returned to more normal levels. 
Horeover, he did not sbow concern 
about the seeming long term deterioration in the statistical indicators. 
Hhile he Ivas favorably impressed I{ith the determination of the new leaders 
to prosecute the vtar and make needed changes, he vJaS vorried about the 
m>Teeping replacement of division and corps commanders and province chiefs. 
The discontinuities and disruptions created by \\Tholesale replacement of 
province chiefs could have a serious negative effect on the vlhole counter-
insurgency program:. 
On the posi ti ve side> he noted tbe strengthened 
chain of cormnand under General Don as both Defense ]'!linister and Chief of 
Staff. 
I~c»amara pOintedly questioned. both Harl;:ins and the other military 
66 
TOP SECR:ii::T 
Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
briefcrs about conditions in the Delta and see11led s]~cptical of the 
offidal optimism, although he "laS eC].ually disinclined to accept 
undocumented negative judgments. 
The conference ended inconclusively with respect to the military 
problem. It did, hOl·rever, underscore 1.'. S. support for the nevT regime 
and focus U.S. official concern on the urgency and gravity of the 
economj c problem confronting the neVi government. 
An urJinformative 
press release afLer the conference took note of U.S. support for the 
new govcrrDnent in facing the difficult political and economic problems 
in South Vietnwn, and pointedly reiterated the plan to vrithdravl 1,000 
U.S, troops by the end of the year ,,>'"it.h 300 to leave on Decem1)er 3. 2.]../ 
Lod.ge f1el{ to Has 1ington the follmving day and c::mferred Hith 
President Johnson. 
Based on tbat meeting and the report of the dis-
cussions at Eorlolulu, a Hational SeclJrity Action r·lemorandum ,vas drafted 
to give Guidance ctnd direction to our efforts to improve tIle conduct of 
the "\var under the nev South Vietnamese leadership. 54/ 
It described 
the plITpOSe of the Am.erican involvement in Vietn81n as, lito assist the 
people and GOvernment of thai.. country to win their contest against the 
externally directed and supported Comm1m:is t conspiracy. II :25/ 
It defined 
contribution to tlJat purpose as the test of all U. S. actions in Vietnam. 
It reiterated the obj ect.i ves of wit.hdraviing l, 000 U. S. troops by the end 
of 1963 and ending the in su.r gency in I, II, and III Corps by the end of 
19611-, and in the Delta by the end of 1965. 
U. S. support for the nE'v! 
regime VJaS confirmed and all U. S. efforts ,.;ere directed to assist it 
to consolidate i t.,self and expand its popul.ar· support. 
In vie', of the 
series of press stories dU:-cing November about the disagreements between 
Harldns and Lodge, the President requested 1lfull unity of support for 
established US policy1l both in Saigon and in Hashington. 56/ 
]'\SAlI 273 
directed the concentration of D,S. and Vietnamese militarY, political, 
economic and social efforts to improve the counterinsurgency campaign 
i n the Mekong DeUa. 
It further directed that economic and military aid 
to the nevl regime should be maintained at the same l evels as during 
Diem
1 s rule. 
And in conclUSion, plans were requested for clandest.ine 
operations by the GVl~ against tbe l\orth and also for operations up to 
50 kilometers into Laos; and, as a just.ification for such measures , State 
'\TaS directed to develop a strong, documented case 1lto demonstrate to t.he 
world the degre to v[hi ch the Viet Cong i s controlled, sustained and sup-
plied from HanOi, through Laos and other channels.
l1 57/ 
As a policy document , rSPJ-1 273 "\ITaS to be extremely short lived. 
In 
the j argon of the bureaucracy, it vras s imply overta}~en by event.s . 
The 
gravity of the military situation in South Vietnam vJaS onl y hinted at 
i n rSAl,,- 273 and in the discussions in Honolulu . 
Its full dimensions 
"muld rapidly come to light in the remaj ning "I'leeks of 1963 and force 
high level reappraisals by year 1 s end. 
But prooably more important, the 
deterioration of the Vietnamese position in the countryside and the rapid 
TOP SBCR8'r . Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SBCRET - Sensitive 
collalise of the strategic ham] et program 1'rere to confront the fragile neK 
political structure in South Vietnam with difficulties it could not sur-
mount and to set off rivalries tbat would fulfill all the dire predictions 
of political i nstability made by men as diverse as John MeckEn and :"ritz 
Tlolting before Diem! s fall. 
68 
TOP Sr.C~ET . 
~eD sitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
IV. B. 5. 
Rob-:::..:t 8!Lplcn., 'Jh:. Lo,:;t 
p. 189 
I 
FOCI-NOTGE:: 
)\.. 
r..~~:id·:in~~ p~,.p~~::~; 
1 H:I3:i:ilj~~i.rtc of' 'l";lK 
C\1:~~~··~}!:1.:~ G:1.t.1n:ti(u.1! for the: 
Sc .. c,~;,.;t . .,;'.:~'Y oj" D::J'('·!:..~, E::>no~nJ.u Confc. (,)1(,(; $ 
I!;.;~·:l G, 1963. 
1966) 
5. 
S:1.:-:" R. G. K. 
ti'l 'c,,,r")f; o~ls liThe S:itu:;r- io~, :tn S01.r:~h V:i.':')tn~-'il; M':,1'ch 1963.~ 11 
MU"ch )"11' :,963. 
, 
o~~. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEeTIlT ~ Senslt:i.Vc 
II 
1. 
CJA J}l"L~Jl:i[{c;ncc EC'fDO: CU"!dllJll Ho. 0811/66,1) 
1 ~ r:",y 1966. 
'1'1118 
C.:;.i"til"il~,t{; 
is Pj:QI),1I. y h;~ 1. 
GvN :t'e:f.'l'z .. '::' o:tfici'41a (~C~;i.l ,:;1.:,(:(1 [l,borr~ 8oo"oao 
CCVIO~Ue[; 'i"'w':~ 1)-",;:;:i:i~ c: 
.:l'U;;:; Cf. Dl1.i. V~~l) V2011~ :In R:1.ch""l',l ~~. 
Linc'lilo: lOp ctT •. ~ \Tic,\;=N,'(l (i',l"l'1 I~i.'bo:r:: 
1.I:i.ol1:;.c~m ste.t(~ Unive:csi-cy .hoe!J.':;, 
19590 ) 
-
-'----
6. 
8<:,i[Jon 
r>lE~3 10~)8p r'l:~~" 18) 10c:-, 
;/)j (C) 
fk., ie: O!1 
rln;~ 1050; j:)(,Y 22~ 1963 (8) 
8. 
S·G~ .. :t;(~ r!.3~ 1159.~ 
1'~ ,,,. 
'J._lo~. 
29~ "10L ', 
~ . 
./ "):; (8) 
St~tc; !L~ZC 171, JUDe 
~. J' 1963 (Ei ) 
10. GoiCO•1 1il:::~ l100, J"l'."'..-:: 
~l, 1>6:; (8) 
11. S2,iGO'i~ ]jll~3 11"r.; 
.>'.' J\mc 9, 1963 (s) 
12. Stif-.tc 11l3r~ J.207, J U2K; 1 .. 
:J 1963 (8 ) 
13· Sa.~r'on nJ.S3 1168, Jnno 12, J.963 (6) 
70 
21. 
22. 
25· 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1' .. i..i.d E··'lb').l'",~t,:q~ 
lI.uS\.1.rJt. 15, 1963. 
"Vic"Gn···.:J.cGC R(~cs Gnin in KC'" A:CL2" 
II J'k'i: YO}:'};: T:lmc.s; 
-----
26. 
J.hjo!' GC:L:.:o.l Y. R. l~'1rLl"j.rl" JCS" 8ACS\1I I'-1c"O:;:',l1C:bJ.:.1 :Co:c the SC::':l:({t~,l'Y 
0:1.' D:;:t'c.nGG 
An::.~ur.·G J.6 ~ 1953 (f»). 
270 r ""1.':n. L·u:," I"r:; 0:::.' St:1.
Ju "· .l' H 11~("1'_' iC!.'-'.'il of Convc.. ",LtJon fo:!o' the Hr. C:! o.d. 
( PJ- iJ5.ci[:,Y,tr;: 
t!10 b·,--,,-,:i.0-n~_.~ J>1.)., It :r:r.:1';'.;n.~ H~G-(cC) Bln.:".Y's 
JIIJ.:-.J10'! ~Ind I'OX');c:s'(,.cJ.) s J·ul.y 4.l' 1963 ( ~'G l!,{}~S ONLY) . 
(0, (.t::.cl!'~cl in 
G.!l:!.xmCi·i,).) • 
28. 
1'.)pa;;·i;mcrrt of Ctc,:ce 
JlI::!'!o,!.', .nd.'}.H of Conv0).'1.~[j'j:lonJl Jul.y ~., 19S3 (8). 
(Attu.:l c1 :in Lr-:li::n(t:t·~ ) 0 
290 
Th:tCt. 
71 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
III 
2. 
'l'C'!xl:. 
:;:·~}!o~_'Gc(]. in S:.:iQ;v1 j"~J 2,sO, A":;o.!Sl; ?1, 1963 (u); o~h_r ..... ccounts 
c:t'(;d.H 1':111.1 '\iLt;}.l t.he m::t·i;.:Ld 1[1,'\-7 
id":!,~ t2S H0j_J.o 
3· 
C·1.e·lt 0 
~.!--
6. 
9. 
13e CIA Info;Cii1:::.tion HG·oo~~·t" o"Poc5t.c 
..,. 
iI~_ 
150 ScdGo!1 m::;~ 316J> 
I,OL:~;0 to H1J.f'T'l:;.U, Al'gUf~t. 2lJ, 1963 (::vs), )';'()POl'ts a con~ 
vcrGatlon 1,et,TcCfl Kaiit!:.nbu:cg (ViT/HG), 
~Tho 
:\Q acc('·np~.'1icO. Loc1~~0 from 
Honolulu, [TIo. Vo Ven Ee.i" Die!. r s chef de ci:;:.b::nc"(;; S::a.lson msg 32hJ> 
Io '1r,,, to C'~'~ " 'r 
~"
,....u t 2h 
1C/? ( •.• ,) 
... -no····-" 
F·l~·iJl··L·)M I c O''''\"'-'''''l'''ion 
r 
u~;,,\,.; 
.J(,;·(,..~l'''J 
.J;'\.vl.~) 
"',-, -/OJ 
).\'); 
.'.~ .... ·.\.v.:) "'''L .. - ... ~l/~ 
.. 1 
, .. J..I~\"'-"~'._ 
v;.i:Lh SCC~CC-C[;.l· r 01 stc.t'3 Nsny.:.m. D.lnh 'j.'h.u:'n. 
Ib:!.(;~ 
-
.. 
TOP S"2~CHET· 
'cD.sit:i.v. 
72 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
rC'(;'neJJ~p ·Lx· . . nsph'ei.1. :i.n '~hc .. [.ids C'1J. r:' .. :l't:L"'l It"ii d.ec:.t'~'-' Ullul1. 1~.1·Gt1,~·t.; 
260 
BCG C1}L.:'urf.; In-G'_~~! lige-nee 1·Ie}!10L-"~lCU'tl OC!)"" Noo 29!3/63" l!."l'Sus"l., 26, 
1963 (f;); < '1<..1.. T:t:( I. C'CC " D:LA, 
I-1c..mm~,- \'clV~ fo:c the f;C"r;J..~C·:;c;.l y 0:(' 1; ~Et!rL_, 
Im:..,.u/t.. ~.:6> 1~S3 (S) 0 
190 
9:l:l.i.l~J1 
[r;;::.!."t("~1I::1rl.. 11.8 :t.'cport(:cl in Sr'.:i.gon !'1:~ 3221., OPo ~~J.; H:l1crn.!1n, 
!2.1~~:i.Ol~J' 9~o~.l:~0> »0 1:.85. 
210 
f.l-l;c:ce r.! ... ~ 2h,). St.:;,tc -Co Loese:.? 
j\.t'S1'.~;t 21~, 1963 (1'iJ ) (c:ti.,: .. chr;u. in 
al)rl~;nL1L_) 0 
-
• 
230 
.k1'Ll11.':' Sc}(Lu,,:tr;~~c:L'5 A 'I lOt': ,1'"1(1 Jb,p;;J ( HO;1 Y():d~: Hou[;;hton IHi'21in COo, 
1965):> 1)0 901f.; for r.:,ni:.J:l·(:~-~,\,t~~- -\'1(:,7 of til!'!;:;..) C'.i,.n ;G, s·e H.i..l::?:l;:l1., 
em G (: it e. n'r) 0 1·:8.)":;1 -9 0 
_LJ.. 
_ 
iI' 
.t. .. _ 
21~ o 
Mic; :1.CJ. VO 
Fcn'j'GfJ',-.~'l~ I\~(;)nC:i.';..D.du.m. for the PrN;iClJ."11·G, l.u3UG-G 25.9 1963 
(TS EYES ONLY); dir'c.'c'<.i (lu.ote frol1l, 'Ima·laH&.ble, u.l1n'L'!.'rrbC1'L,<1 S:.:tr:o. c_blc. 0 
27 0 
HnLm"~n, £:£o£:tto~ IJl>o 
4 88~9o 
28, 
Ibic1c 
31c 
S c~ Cn:cz"'n-t; Intel:ligC!nce HCl'1ore-.n{h, OCl No. 2339/ 63, Au!:;ust 1 J~, 1963, 
nd OCI NOQ 23tf1/ 63, I\.UgUtTC 21, 1963 (8 ) . 
320 
Ibiel. 
330 
Ibi<1e 
350 
CIA to Stt:'..tc (n.o mmibcJ ... ), August 26, 1963 (1£8) e 
CAS 
~J.).ig(jn 03116, ClL "to 8t~i.tC, Augu.st 27; 106? 
.- ./ ..J (TB ) 0 
CbS S~.i'::';OD 03;7, CIh t,o S tC.~.:t·:~ J A"i.1Gust 27, 1963 (8). 
TOP BEeBE'! • 
Sl,;n~i t:l.VO 
73 . 
39. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP Sf;GREr - f3ensHiv8 
Hilsman, op.C:1t., pp. h90~9L 
1'''OL' [" simll'T accour''G [CG fc'(J.csin[,:Cel"" 
2.:.Q.git.~ p~-90j~. 
The \-jl'c.\l9,ll(':L 0:; o:i'fici.~,l rc,:::o:('~1.; fo:.:. tbc HGC 
meet.ingb :i.n Av;:;ust; September, Gno. Octob ;:c 1953 :t(;t}u:iy",::: D. n'ujoL' c;:vcc::t. 
on tbe P:'Tt ot the Luthoz' \.':1th rC';'·jJC:c'(, to the £m_1Yf:ls of \!e:'.Lhing1.,on 
pol icy c.'.Lth:.r. tio?J:; :Co:,::, th-l p, ':'i'O;:.1. 
0:: PC:::los::·:l:l.;y, the (;.1..1':-110:(' lLS 
t ill'nCo. to '\:~hr; public ·::'OUj'(~.J (,i"ic:h 
::-.'(.\~ noJ~ 1·i:L'lihou!.; bie.D) in [.n cffol"1; 
to piece torr ..... th_:;:· the sto:'~r oJ: ho,; C.ccir ions h;l'C 1'<.£:.Cl1~a; priIll_X' jly 
Rog(;r m.JelT1(,.'.1" '1'0 Hov(': C'. N<"l.:Lon, op.cl'\.;.; Ab"(·hLU' Schlc:;cdnC<.::t', 
A Thous~>.n(l ) ws;-op.ci'li'.-;--i,nd ;fohri-!.i:::cklin, !:IiJJGIOl1 :in :L'ar! i.:·nt, 9J ..... c:tt • 
. - ---
-
H~,rk:ilw to 'l't.yJ OJ: ancl F01'l; ('I'S, Exl';S OJ';LY), AuguJt 28, 
t1,c.l~d..:!(l~o 
1~4 . 
Ibiel. 
45. 
Hilsm".n., 212.Ci~. ~ pp. 492-3. 
46. 
Ibid. 
ll·7 . 
State lllSg 269, President; to Loc'(ge ~ liugus'G 28, 1963 ('l'S ); :-.li.(1 JCS 
msg 3385, 'f" Jr1o:c 'co HD,rkin s ~ A w·t.1St. 29, 1963 (1'8). 
1+8. 
State nlsg 268~ state "GO Loage~ Al1.zust 28, 1963 (TS ) . 
50. CAS Saigon 11lS3 0437, Augu.st 29, 1963 ('1'S ) . 
51. Snigon m:::g 375, LOl'l3c to Sts.:tc, J'mgu.s·c 29, 1963 (TS ) . 
52. 
MACV m;~'g 1566, H0.rldnG to Taylor, AUGu,:;"t 29, 1963 (TS ) . 
55. stv.te mS3 272, StG:!:;(j " 0 LoCl.:;c (J.1.d. Ht:..:tklns, AusuGt 29, 1963 ('rs ) . 
TOP f3ECRET - Scnr;J:civ0 
59. 
610 
6t; .• 
66. 
68. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP S:r:;CR8.L - SClldti vo 
G! 8 Sd:;O;l mE ~ O~·99,1' C LA to Stu;l;c" .h1.t£,1.l,:,t 31. s 1953 (S); l.lnd Sai £:,Oll 
mq~ 391,9 1..063.: to S·0:..t", l\.n.:!.Tw·l; 31, 1963 (Ci.'3). 
10:;'(1 .• 
lb: 0 .• 
Ibid .• 
-
1 !~ . 
So.:ig(.\)1 IN<~ 388, Lodsc to Sto"tc, Au[~ust 30, 1963 ( ~"S ) ; Ss,ie;on meg 391, 
Loa(l;G to state, AUGust 31, 1963 
( ~l'~3). 
19· 
501. 
TO:O 
SEC1{i~II 
0 
Sr~n.Gj.t,'-ve 
------
15 
82. 
83· 
8!~. 
86. 
87. 
B8. 
90. 
91. 
92. 
93· 
95. 
96. 
1,1:..,jor 
(TsL 
IbJc1. 
lb i,cl. s 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
G~i.1~i.'ol Vo 
pp" 1~2. 
pp. 2-3. 
[~c..Ll(. ... :i..l1sur, C/;:l.C:it..$ p. 905; HnC~H 1~ op.c5t., pj). 502-5()5; G'ul 
I,h;c1<-J..iils orocT~o 208 eh"\:; I'- J..'iJ.1J e1 -.::-c(:ou.r;t:~ of tll:i..s m3
r ··G:inc. 
IITrQncC).':i.pt of b:~'O~0.C!e s'c on NBC I G 'Eu~'li,lcy~Dr:L~11".lcy Hope.!.' G ' , 
Sc.ptcmb::::r· 9, 1963", PLlI;lic P2..Cj:8 ot the Pl'c:')'ic1en-cs, op.c1t., p. 659. 
SaiGon JIlf'~ t!'78, 
Loc1::;~ -to State,; Sc'oL~ubcT.' J.l~ 1963 (TS ) . 
S::dg01" mi)g 
t~83, LO,-1,:;. a.nd Brc:nt to S'i:;~.tc, 0n t!'l"l 13';7;18 Q~:Y, took th:) op}}odt;) 
ViCiT n11d requcr;-liccJ. }. ~TilliE;r.do:l t.o Ll)p:"o're p::.1clin.3 aid pro;:';1.\:jt)t'. 
Th:ts 
cable p:..'obc.1)ly rcflecJ(;s Brcnt f ~ Vi(;~'7, in ,·:hie}), Locl.g<.: 
conCi.u:r~cl -to 
void )'ovc-:.:.1i~!3 ·('h~ cO~ltm1'i.; of' h:lG e~n'licr c.::.b1c . 
Sr.1gon L1SZS 469~477, :Googe to St8,ta, Sept:::-:mbol" 12, 1963 ('J:[j ) • 
stc;tc msg 391, St2.te to Loo,:;e, 
S::;:ot~-,mbc:r. J.2, 1963 (1'8) • 
s-to,tc mS3 
) ~ll, St:1tc to LO')~~j Sopt.~!!lbcr 14 :I 1963 (TS). 
HA.CV msg 161~9s Ih~"klp::, to Tc.JJ.o~·-, S31kctIlcol' 9.9 1963 (TS ); MJl.CV liW3 
1675; Hc"l\::ina to Tv,ylm.~~ S::r.At.',~bsl> 12, 1963 ( ~l,18 ) ; c.no. John Ao l\!cConJ, 
Dil'(.ctOJ' CIA, Nc·;nol,".n.c1llJI., S:;!l"t;."'I,i;)('l' 13 ~ 1963 (rrs) . 
TOP SEcrIST 
99~ 
100. 
10 ~o 
105. 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP 8ECmc:,l' 
MAC",r T;l,<'0..' 
~75~;1< 
E~" 1 "n" '.:0 rj1 
V~ ~ 
~ 
.> J 
C· 
.~.L 
~'" 
.....~ J..vl'., 
nob:..X' FilP!!' 11,? j·jCLlO:" 'ld.1'.I~ to tb.:J SCC!..'(,';"r: "',; of 8'L:. .. :i:ie, Hnbj:c~;: 
V;i .. et-N:-)'a, G :(Jt:'7l!b'::'1' 16, 1963 (T;ja,El'I';'J Ol'JJX). 
C!~P n:s""' 63c,l6, m~i';;<" Ho:'~" ';';0 Loc)~~, S(;p'GEnbcr 17) 1963 (;;s) 
( :l.'Vt;:'l.c·h')O,· ;:, u])", ;;dL.) • __ 'J.' 
19, 
108. 
St~"i:i,-, )11'"'3 431, l-r(~,:dc"'nt; to LO(i~~:, S~p'i.;cllbc::i.' 18, 1963 ('l'8); "'TId 
S.:-.ison 1I1~'~ 5t..O..., L00;:,> to n.',-,!:!icknt, 8Dptcmb~:::' 18s 1953 ("1'8). 
110. 
l'?:cG:i.clcnt Jo~m 1'0 K('Dnoc1ys llC;-,lO:t'sndum fo'!.' t.ho SCCJ,'c'tm 
of D.)i'cnt:c, 
GpC",""O':::l' 21.9 1963 ( ~i'B ) (ctt.c.(!he,l in ap:p::l1~ii: ... ). 
111. 
Se;""r.::t:;,:,:,y of D-:!:;:'cn~J' Robe!vt S. HCX:::';:18,1"~j'Jl lkmc-.1,'ks '00 tho P;;'I.:cs on 
D;;:p.:~:ct·m.'0. f():,~ Vict.n:::.,'n, lmc3rmm fIFD" ].ld.; scpt"m11Cl' 23, J.963. 
113 · 
Cc "·,n1~m(l.-"r UGW~CV, ItT:<.'ClUct;:!::i.pt of OJ):;n:! ng Confel'cncc -wit. , the Sccr0~ 
t{tr;r of D\,;f0.n;:c~ !..:nb"'ss(lCi.o:r r,lcl CJ1C':t~u1::~"t'1 of the Joint Cldd's of 
stuff on the S-ktU8 of the US Eff'O:t:; in Vi e:-t!):.: '': " , ?5 Septc'1'b(;z' 1963 (TS ) . 
str~tc lJ1Sc; 
Sc:ptC'ibcr 
September 
for jI.nb:3s.-:'c".or J",oC1:;c ".n5. fJ::,cJ.'<:r.~:i'y McN~na~ra, 
end SGiS041 moSS 593, 
EY'}:~S ONLY f01' Pl cs i<lont, 
115-
s~; gon m;::z 61?; Loc1.::;e.. to st~(,c, Sc:p-i;cnl e:c 29; 1963 (TS ) . 
77 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SEGP"DJ.! 
S~;!")sitj_,,'\:' 
-"-'-"-
121. 
US/l.lD D:~':Lcfi!1C; l'\)D_J:'; IlI...icd:;:l.rlg of Pos~;:;.bl( l":Cc-l1Ul.1C /'..1.(1 S'll.JPCnr::iC21!J 
, .. r:i:(;h 
:C.3ti'11~ .. ted J.j~i·:\C·G::;, II no (,-:be (8.:r..1111 .LS) • 
122. 
Scc:;~cti:ny oJ: :r;:':;:\;l1D"~ 
r·1r"'(1:·~'"1(}1.U:·1 for. ·Lh .. 
r.".G:i.('C'nt~ f:ubj.:;c~·t: 
TIcpm:0 
of t'I'i,C: l.-1ciL'·' .. ':,.ti'l'-ylo:..' ;.l:l.G~;;.Ol1 'GO Son.:~h VtCi.-r>.'l", 2 OC'Gcibcr J.963 (S),lI 
:[Jo2 
( CO':l.clusL"'~~ c,;:J.(! ... :t'\::CCm:. ncht;io~;,<j L'.'C/G'Nc!l"'ci. in aPI,,-;nr]j :) 0 
123~ 
n)icl~ 
12::·., 
Ibi(~9" 1),,50 
125· 
n1:LC 0 
---
126 ~ 
'J:b.e 1.1'000 )l'~ll \iithdJ.'~ .. u['l .. 
'pJ.~n is cl.c&lt Wit!1 in cJ.ctdJ. in <"nO~'13T 
Tu.uk ]7'o)"c;c r~11)eJ:', 
"I'l~0.GCO." H:i-ch([.i~c·.-;L1 of US F01:ec.;":j J.962 h lS6),H. 
129. 
NS!\1'l; l"ioo 263, O~tob(.:c 1.1, 1963 ( 'l'3 r::n::s O}\'LY), cl':1pn:...sis r.c:ckd 
(ct ;~ .c}-".::d in 2.pp:.D.dix) 0 
131. Ibio. 
10 
6. 
'7 c· 
80 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP 2~C1~r -
Scn~jtlv~ 
-_._--------_ 
.. _-
IV 
c/,g mes rvs 97~;O~ to ste.."Ge 
f:i.'(~l 
C1S mc~~ l-\t~ 97~;3 "to 
~1t&. ·c '" f:.c 1 
E~a;:lG:vn m.[:~ 676.i 1,06':':0 to E.,t,,"A~'~ J 
s::-;.: SOY"t, 
Eo:-' -i gO"'''" 
O~"l;o";)::":C 
Oe'0obej:' 9:, 1967 
Oc·i.,oly'1,"' 9 ~ 1967 
, c< ) 
\.,.) ; 
(s'\· 
I J 
10, 196'7 ('.1';') 0 
Su.i2:0~ m::'c; 6371; to S'" .' ., fl"CY:l J...') "' ... 
OC"',C)b~l' C". 
10.1""'·) (S) • 
~ 
l....,~ t· ..... 
--' 
) 
/, 
:;;0:> 
Sr.:) ('on 11"'S 6r.), 
,J • ;; to S"G_ .~c: f:L'C .. _1 Lo(,gc, 
o·:;to~)~:(· 7; 1963 ('l'S) • 
Sn .. lso:n 
rrtr~ rt' 
l.~ ~~ 6),'" 
L\ "'J to St.G.te f:r-0Y'l Lo:12:'·· , O:::';'OD :.c' 6,1 1963 ( ~·S ~':tTS 
JJ):i.d~ 
Sr5.:on lr.::.~ 652" "to S:ta'i..c fl'Cm. LoCD:' .• 
o{:~torJ 
~~ 7, 1963 (T" 
.,...).,.1 
B~ill'1 
f.>ai:,cl1 rnGg 61:7, to St,~.:G~ fJ.'Cml 
I~oc1~(".. , 
Oct,ob{;~~ 7, lS63 (~s) 0 
0"" r\ 
," .. - /" 
07'if ") 
..... Ll 
(\ 
100 
Sr·jcon m'3 715,S OC"/:,ODC:i' 16" J953 (c); 8,)"\(3. Sc..:iGcn mE'S 732,p 
O~\jo'bGl' 
18, 1963 (~r3 ) Q 
12" 
S~lcon )'1(..;5; 731, Octo (;1' 18, 1953 (S). 
130 
t'~I~CV nsr~ J01 8250;1 f01' Gener, ). 'I(~y:Lo:c and AJ:1i:r.'c:.l Fe:):;; :f':cc-n Ib.:ckinG,$ 
Oc'iio1)c:r: 17; J.963 (TS)o 
16 0 
D~p.llrtrl.,:LG of S'I.;c, -A, INR R;:;;:;c:;.rc 
?·:enlOr" nauru R?E90, Octollor 22, 
1963 (S)o 
st ,,~ r. 1)1'.'(' t;')() 
OC+:c" 
')' l! 
3. 0'" '.' (r.; ) 
I 
.... ~·llv 
t.c~ J 
/ '-~; 
~'\...i '_.io. 
", 
/.) 
I.-' 
0 
200 
79 
TOP SECRET -
S~ aitivc 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
260 
f}i.~·L·C r'l.«~ 5'(6 .. to LOI.1:jC 1':l.'o_! the F~· \,;.d'1"""1.·::) O~tol):;~ 11;., 1963 (,l'S 
EyeS O:UY).:; Ll1d 08 S~.~Go!' r'!.;:~ lJl!28s LO"::.;c "to t ho 1'1(:.['1':' :.;)",-l;, 
Oct;!jbC:C 15; 1903 (r,rfJ ) 0 
C.,/I 0, 
r:'.,:_Lr.~(~·.l T 
.. I_~,r... 138)\-
Oc}~ (' '),~-.!... 3 
1 a~3 ( ,e), ) • 
... 
~ _ ~_ 
__ 
_, 
,,~. _ 
,._,/V 
, 
29" 
CllS Sd ;~c..Ti li: J 
1~l.lJ..5, to St.~:i;;c frC:j,\ Lo ]S'''; ,'1 O::-t,oDc-r 5$1 1963 ( ':i_~i ) 
( l1;ttr;:~chQGl :lXt_ al)F(;l') (J .. :J..~~ ) () 
300 
c.t,S [~~d_C~(Jl' nc~ 3tt026, to 8t:-<ot.~ i.'1:Ci1 LOC:;/~, Octob:-:r.' 5, 1963 ('3:8 
EYID ONLY FOr 
8ECREWJ~Y RU:J;n. 
310 
Ib:Lc)." 
320 
C/l.P lMg 63560 via CIS ch3.:£r1Jl, OCi;O'l:lC>l" 5, 1963 ('l'S) 
( [~M.,:"chcd in 
ap;;:·cnuh.) 0 
350 
US.APJ.r/t S::d.f!;:on ffiJg 199$1 fl·C>,.!l Jone8, USAl1HA ~ Saigon,? to HcN: ~T;J:!,X\." 
OC"tOb3\' 2J., 1963 ( r.rs ) 0 
39. 
Thiel. 
~Oo CAS m.c.g 77878.~ to Loa~(:JI OCtob0l' 2)4." 1963 (TS ); and CAS m lj~ 7811n, 
McCone to S.,5con, Oct;6Dc;,,' 21~.9 1963 ( TS ) 0 
80 
TOP SECRET -
S Cll~ itiVG 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP 
~:[~CBE'J' .• 
rcn~5t:LV':~ 
-. 
-.... --_.-
11·5 
CAS Sc,igon m;,;~~ 1961~, IOll~'.C to MC.({cOJ:g-..: Bp~10y, Oc'/;obc:>:' 25, 1963 ('1S ) 
(e:Ltcwhcd. :tn 
c ~:>l!~nd.:l.x ) • 
46 c 
11: itt. 
1}.7. 
Cl.P lTI.~'S 63590, HcGc o:Y'c~e 13l nc1y to Lo~\~c" 0:; 'ob,.r 25, J963 ('1\3) 
( L;ttu:;I!0rl :in u.p:r(,nGi.~·) 0 
510 :r.b:i.rlo 
550 
el'S \1: '"ll::n:;to·j, )il;:~ 79109., Fc:G:Ol':3c, I:nnr:y t.o L00C~e" Oct.ob::.;l,' 30, 1963 
(T,S) 
( ~,.tta(lhe(l. in 11}!ydl(li ~ ) 0 
56.. 
1\:J~C{ l"",g ~:033.t lk;dd.!1S '1.,0 'I'c:.y1o:c, Oetoo;:;2' 30;; 1963 (TS ) 
( G.J~t.D.ch~<.l. 111 
• 1Y~~ :;::0 ~1ix ) 0 
570 
NAC'.T meg 20~ ~j IL~l~,.:il1n to 1';:',ylo,-', OC"tO'b0j,' 30 1963 (rs ) (. ·Vt.V.~h8d in 
~pp:ndix ) c 
58c 
J:.1/W r ril:.g 2028,. 
Ik.r)~ins tc' ~(I,-yloJ"j C;.~t(;b·;l' 30, 1963 (T:3) 
( [,tt~ .. chcd In 
(:l,P]?l..llcl.t:>:) e 
o"Pocii..o 
:.-.. 
---=, 
... ~ 
61 ~ 
GlIB S ~".:l.son mfg 201~O JOT) 0('. 'i.t ~ 
.. _._-
620 
CAS ·Pu;hing\:.cn mEg 79109:; ?E. o :::..~t.i 
63 0 CAS St.l.ieon ll\:.,g 2063, LodL;~ to S-tu:l:c, Octo or 30, 1963 (Irs) ( ntt(1,c1:}U 
in append:1:,:) 0 
61:.. 
c.tJ~\ IL,')hi!1:;tol.1 ecg 791107. Bm'oy 'l;o 1,0 gQ, octoher 30, 1963 (T3 ) 
(r;ttLc wd in c.IJPcIHI h. ) 
. 
65. 
Ibic10 
81 
TOP SECRE'l' - Sens:ttiv", 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
FOO1'NOI'ES 
30 
It:Lr:; (';-t.:cc"'"YIcly 0:lf'i'j.crl1:i:. to Fi.<.."!CG 
togc:t;"h.~r Erell"! cla.~'f;i:L:i N1. sonre.;):.; 
the s"(.o·'·Y' of' t}10 CCT .. ,lee intrlS1!.3s t.1L:li culr'1:i.i.1.:c.cc1. in th.~ eo1.'p 
i":~8c.lf'. 
In \'iC1·r 02 hi~3 c:t.ensiv\.:. CC:")l~: ~".;:; [ ,1-::''1.'~; U.S. on1 Vietnc .. F\~';'" off:ci;;.ls 
in Sa:lgol1.. 
~~s vdJ. f'..S tJl).C'lS the £;t:nc'.''Ilr::; the rno:Jt plr'uJ1.blc Ll1.d. 
c· .... lr.ilcd ~cccun\.: of th~ 1'1ott-:in~; ~.'1a. cour.d;ey~plot"ti"')~, C"la. toL; 0; ~~ 07 
T'"',)': ";1' '("11:1" n .... , ,'... 
~ 
. 
",.'. l-'" "1 
• --1" ,.,., 
" (. "';1'," 
0;> I'r,") ,.;. 
l •. .L~,_-,-
• 
~.;) !..'- ...... L ... \._' •• t'J.V .... ' 
'_ ~ lC.O,.jlJ 
... J.,,:......\r.l.. Y ,', ~ ... .l.\..; ........ ?.1. 
It. c.;.f.)· 
..:.... 
lv_ V.1. ~ 
Sl\ ,")1 em :in r',c' L-"''-
') '''OJ ' 1 "'0'1 
o'~ ro ' t 
~'1) 
"O'i.,';'12 
: .• -~ .. -
.~ 
•. 
J..,~,1 ' .
.
... ~i-,.\..I 
,;.. ..... ; V .,.t .. V .I. 
_,' 
.. ~.,.:.;.;;.:. (j JJ 
J~)..lo U 
c.. 
~_ " ... .,.... 
0 
12. l:Jl3,tC;V-:!:t'" if :,u';)"l;hi2~7) t :tanE,p::.:cecl. bc-cH'}cn i;rr_~;jb:i.nston c:,.nd jI,l'rr.J.-b Snipon 
0 :-1 Ho ~c':El OZ· 1, C ... ?1, only b~ i',C6E::l'k .. uwd thron~h iu-i;cl'V i Ct7,3 e 
}lec}- in, 
15· Shaplcn, op • .£l!. , p. 2080 
16. 
CIA Saigon CR I~:I C lJ1SC; 18 to D:tJ'ector N~~A) Novcmb~r 2, 1963 (S). 
17· 
CIA Se-igon. CRrr:W 111Sg 19 to Dh'c('tor USA., 
r~o v(;rrlber 2, 1963 (s) • 
18. Sec S<.dgcrl E.Sg 888.1' 1,0(.1[$ ... to st;:,.tc, r-Tov::n;lbcr 2, 1963 .. 8:h5 l~.m. (S), 
for the coni'lict:inu ,re:cs.i.0"13 of thC' mul'ucc. 
20. 
state m::g 683, NOV'G:uo::r 1, 1963" 
8:1.~7 p.m. (S EYES ONLY). 
82 
TOP SECRE·r 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
po 909. 
26. 
~l"\o.
- 886 
<,' 
• 
$ I.odge to St:"::t~, Nov'c!1!ber 2~ 1963 (u). 
2S, 
StD:i,e 1118~ 701}J 
WGi1.t~ to Loc.1~c, l'JoV'C'1"ibu):' 3, 1963 (8); t;n0. Ek:.:i.gon 
illf.Jg 917, Lod~~ "'0 St~:t(:: NOVv·1bc::c 1!, 1963 (8 ). 
29· 
S.::.1i.2:c~n. m~~g 917~ op·Si.t. 
Saigon lf1: c; 92'{" 
I..od~.:: '(',0 S-Lat!! , 1'1ov;:;;0.1),,:1' 5" '1963 (u) • 
8a5,~on mt{~ 929.9 I.o0."c to S'c:"t(~, NO\"Embcr t: 'h 1963 (u) • 
33. 
st~~t;c ru;G; 71~ 2, s't..~,tc to LoC2;8.1' Novc--caber 6, 1963 (8); St::rte j <1E'C 7);,9, 
stc..tc. 'GO V:x~~e, I'JovC"ol)':!l' 7, 191-: 3 (C). 
35· 
rO:(~ D, ecncJ"(·.l nsscr'CllKn't; of t.h{; T)oliticc.l sHua:tion, SCi) CIA S:-j.i~;on 
Inr::{~ 2428, lJovc:nbcr lt~, 1963 (S EYES ONLY) . 
36. 
st~tc mzs 701, stc.tc 'co Lot3c, NO'fUrl)Cl' 2; 1963 (S). 
37. 
S ~l1.gon msg 975, 1,oc13~ ·~ o State,? N07Cmbcl' S, 1963 (s). 
39· 
ItO. 
CIHCPAC mer; to JCS 1206011-Z 63 (s). 
41. 
S::dgon 111;:; 925." Lod~0 to st,<.l..tc:, I{OV'(:rll'uel' 9, ).963 (8 ), HiS liP,'hts 
']:-l"/ Sr.:Lc;on t s lii':-8Jdy P:..~ocresB Rcpo~: LJ. 
1~2 • 
Saigon nw"" 917, OJ!. c :l.t • 
'l'OP f;ECR!TI' 
S::''1D~tivc 
83 
Stctc 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
1!·9o 
"S1..'.;n1llt:'2 y of Sp:..::;i.::l MrotiDcr on. the R(~LJnblie of Viccru'1., I! CIi'-JC" AC 
HC0.c1.C1Ui.J:tc:cs;- . 20 l'Jo':,~nber 1963 (TS), }?p . l~ 30 
510 
~<.9 p. 12. 
55. 
Th:i.C .• 
56. 
Ibid. 
TOP SECRET 
C' -:~ns j.t i vc 
