—

—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

When the build-up of U.S. combat forces got underway the build-up
of U.S. advisors had already been essentially completed. Being an
advisor in the field had been the most challenging assignment a U.S.
soldier could seek; being with a U.S. unit in combat now became the
aim of most. The advisory effort sank into relative obscurity as the
attention of policymakers (and of the press and public) focused on the
U.S. force deployments, on building the base complexes from which U.S.
military might could project itself into the countryside, and in ex-
ploring the new relationships and new opportunities occasioned by the
commitment of U.S. land forces to the Asian mainland.

A number of measures which would have changed materially the U.S.
advisors' relationship to their Vietnamese counterparts were examined
briefly in mid-1965. Each was dropped. The encadrement of U.S. and
ARVN units was favored by President Johnson. General Westmoreland
opposed it =~ apparently because of language problems and the difficult
logistic support problem it would create =- and the issue quickly died,
except for the experimental Combined Action Platoons (CAPs) formed by
the Marines. The subject of a combined U.S.-RVNAF command was brought
up. Secretary McNamara was more favorably disposed toward achieving
"unity of command'' than were his senior military advisors and the U.S.
Mission representatives in Saigon. They were keenly aware of GVN
sensitivity to any measures which would explicitly finger the increas-
ing Americanization of the war effort. So combined command was shelved,
too, The GVN even opposed a joint US-JGS staff to coordinate the war
effort. The staff was never formed.

PACIFICATION REEMPHAS IZED

As the build-up of U.S. combat forces reached a level permitting
offensive forays against the VC (and North Vietnamese Army) forces,
there gradually evolved a division of responsibilities between U.S. and
Vietnamese forces in which the former were to concentrate on defeating
the main forces of the VC/NVA and the latter were to give primary em-
phasis to the pacification program. Half of ARVN was to operate in
support of pacification.

This division of effort threw most U.S. advisors into pacification ~~
with ARVN units as well as in the province and district advisory teams.
It also threw the U.S. military advisors into closer contact ~- and
competition and conflict ~- with the growing number of advisors on civil
functions (many of whom were U.S. military men on 'loan!') representing
the CIA, AID, and USIA. The question was raised of the optimal internal
U.S. organization to support the Vietnamese pacification program.

The result of a drawn-out, occasionally acrimonious debate on this
question was an intermixed civil-military organization embracing the
entire pacification effort, headed by a civilian of ambassadorial rank
under COMUSMACV's direction, Called Civil Operations and Revolutionary
Development Support (CORDS), it replaced a bilinear system in which

vii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
