Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

cory THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF . TOP SECRET
Washington 25, D. C. SECURITY INFORMATION

3 March 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Subject: United States Objectives and Courses
: of Action with Respect to Communist -
Aggression in Southeast Asia.

1. In accordance with the request contained in your
memorandum, dated 16 February 1952, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
heve studied NSC 124, a draft statement of United States
policy on the ebove subject, end a steff study relating there-
to, both prepared by the National Security Council Steff. The
views of the Joint Chiefs of Steff regarding the proposed
policies enuncieted therein are set forth belov.

2. NSC 124 recommends United States courses of action in
the several areas of Southeast Asia. Taken either separately
or together, acceptance of most of these courses of action
and hence of NSC 124, involves the making of a single basic
decision. This basic decision is whether or not the United
States, in support of the objective of NSC 124 stated as "to
prevent the countries of Southeast Asia from passing into the
Communist orbit," would be WILLING to take military action

China. An affirmation at this time within the National
Security Council of such ea willingness does not necessarily
involve taking a decision now whether or not to go to war

in advence of the nature and extent of the aggression becoming
@ppérent. On the other hand, effirmation of this willingness
should be made with a clear understanding of the implications
which the adovtion of these courses of action would entail.

In addition, such affirmation of this willingness is essential
in order to provide the basis for determining:

@. The cost of these courses of action, in terms
of men, money, and materiel; °

b. The impact of these courses of action upon the
economy of the United States;

c. The impact-of these courses of action upon United
States militery assistance programs with particular
reference to the inevitable reduction in the United
States contribution to the North Atlantic Treaty Organi-
zation (NATO) effort; and

TOP SECRET

L486
