Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ec. Our decision on reinforcement inevitably will raise
the question of how to relate this action to possible nego-
tiations. Anything we say or do with regard to negotiations
causes the sharpest scrutiny of our motives on the part of
our Vietnamese allies and we should be very careful at this
time that we do not give them added grounds for suspicion.
If it appears desirable for us to make a new negotiation
overture in connection with reinforcement, it will need
eareful preliminary discussion with the GVN authorities.

d. The following political actions are worth considering
in connection with our decision on reinforcement:

(1) A renewed offer of negotiation, possibly
with a private communication that we would suspend the
bombing for a fixed period without making the time limita-
tion public if we were assured that productive negotiations
would start before the end of the period.

(2) A public announcement that we would adjust
the bombing of the North to the level of intensity of enemy
ground action in the South.

(3) As a prelude to sharply increased bombing
levels, possibly to include the closing of Haiphong, a
statement of our intentions made necessary by the enemy
offensive against the cities and across the frontiers.

(4) Announcement of the withdrawal of the San
Antonio formula in view of the heightened level of aggression
conducted by North Viet-Nam.

(5) Keep silent.

The foregoing is merely a tabulation of possible polit-
ical actions to consider in chossing the military alterna-
tive. In the end, military and political actions should
be blended together into an integrated package.

e. The choice among these political alternatives
will depend largely on our decision with regard to reinforce-
ments for General Westmoreland. However, the present mili-
tary situation in South Viet-Nam argues strongly against a
new negotiation effort (d. (1)) and any thought of reducing
the bombing of the North. If we decide to meet General
Westmoreland's request, we could underline the significance
of our action by d. (3). In any case, we would appear well-
advised to withdraw from the San Antonio formula (ad. (4) ).

166 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
