Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. Evolution of the Situation

In the history of the Vietnam War, the Year 1965 is notable for
momentous and feteful U.S. decisions. In February, after a dramatic
increase in activity initiated by the Viet Cong, the United States
responded by increasing its own level of commitment to the Republic of
Vietnam. For the first time, U.S. jet aircraft were authorized to
support the RVNAF in ground operations in the South without restriction.
In immediate retaliation for guerrilla raids on U.S. installations in
the South, U.S. aircraft also began bombing targets in the southern
reaches of North Vietnam. In early March, the latter program evolved
into Rolling Thunder, the sustained bombing of the North. Also, during
March, two U.S. Marine battalions were landed at Da Nang on the coast
of Central Vietnam. The airbase at Da Nang was a major supporter of
the Rolling Thunder bombing, and the mission of the Marines was to
strengthen its defenses. Those troops represented the first. U.S. ground
combat commitment to the Asian mainland since Korea.

While the. pace of military activity in 1965 was on the rise, the
political situation in South Vietnam remained as unpredictable as it had
been throughout the previous year. A very confusing series of events in
the middle of February culminated in the departure from Vietnam of the
volatile General Nguyen Khanh. Left in his stead were two civilians,
Prime Minister Phan Huy Quat and Chief of State Phan Khac Suu.

The rate of ground combat activity dropped off in March and remained
low for the next month and a half. The Viet Cong eased the pressure on
the GVN considerably and yielded the initiative to the government armed
forces. The performance of the RVNAF, whose effectiveness was called
into question with the deployment of U.S. troops to look after major
bases, began to improve according to the statistical indicators used to
measure the progress of the war. Whenever the RVNAF succeeded in locat-
ing and fixing the Viet Cong, the government troops and their officers
seemed to demonstrate more offensive spirit and willingness to engage.

Parallel to hopeful signs on the military side, Premier Quat, a
quietly determined man, showed promise that for the first time the
Vietnamese might be close to solving their frustrating political prob-
lems. Under Quat, the progressive deterioration in governmental
stability seemed at long last to have halted. . a

The reaction of the U.S. community to the period of quiescence in
the spring of 1965 was mixed. Pessimistic predictions in March as to
the capability of the RVNAF to withstand the next wave of Viet Cong
offensive activity were offset by convictions that ongoing U.S. aid
programs were adequate to meet the situation provided the GVN resolved
its internal contradictions and devoted its energies to the war.

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
