Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At the Berlin Quadripartite Foreign Ministers meeting in
February, however, Secretary Dulles was forced to give in on the French
demand that Indochina be placed on the Geneva agenda. Bidault pressured
the U.S. by threatening to scuttle the project for the European Defense
Community which then was at the top of U.S. priorities. Dulles could not
block Paris’ determination to discuss Indochina at Geneva for it was, in
the last analysis, France's war. He must have realized that the Laniel
Government could not completely avoid negotiations without alienating
itself from popular opinion and bringing about its downfall at the hands
of the anti-war opposition parties.

The United States successfully opposed Soviet efforts at
Berlin to gain for Communist China the status of a sponsoring power,
and successfully held out, furthermore, for the inclusion in the Berlin
communiqué of a statement that no diplomatic recognition, not already
accorded, would be implied either in the invitation to, or the holding of,
the Geneva Conference. 6/

2. The Ely Mission (March 20 - 2h)

a. Dien Bien Phu Begins

On March 13, 1954, the VPA, under the direct command of
General Giap, began its assault upon Dien Bien Phu. This fortress in
Northern Vietnam was to take on a political and psychological importance
far out of proportion to its actual strategic value because of the upcoming
Geneva Conference. The Viet Minh correctly foresaw that a show of decisive
force, not to mention a victory, would markedly strengthen their hand at
the conference. Further, a defeat of the French Union forces would sap
the will of the French nation to continue the struggle. The Viet Minh
were greatly helped by a substantial increase in the level of Chinese
military aid including artillery and radar. 7/ As the battle developed,
the optimism which had pervaded Washington statements, public and private,
on the war was replaced with the conviction that unless new steps were
taken to deal with Chinese aid, the French were bound to go under.

General Paul Ely, French Chief of Staff, arrived in Washington
on March 20 to confer with U.S. officials on the war situation. Ely's
principal aims were to obtain American assurance of air intervention in
the event of Chinese aerial attack, and to obtain further U.S. material
assistance, especially B-26 bombers.. Dulles told Ely that he could not
then answer regarding U.S. response to Chinese air intervention. 8/

Ely subsequently contended in his Mémoires that he received a promise
from Admiral Radford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to push for
prompt American approval of interdiction should the contingency arise.
As to the supply of bombers, twenty-five additional B-26's were promised.

b. Operation Vulture (Vautour)

According to subsequent French reports, General Ely was
asked to stay 24 hours longer than planned in Washington, during which
time Admiral Radford made an informal but major proposal to him. Radford
is said to have suggested a nighttime raid against the perimeter of

B-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
