Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Ambassador proposed to "have frank and friendly
talk with Diem and explain our serious concern about present situation
and his political position."

" . . . IT realize some measures I am recommending are
drastic and would be most unpolitic for an Ambassador to make
under normal circumstances. But conditions here are by no means
normal. Diem government is in quite serious danger. Therefore,
in my opinion prompt and even drastic action is called for.
I am well aware that Diem has in past demonstrated astute judgment
and has survived other serious crises. Possibly his judgment
will prove superior to ours this time, but I believe nevertheless
we have no alternative but to give him our best judgment of what
we believe is required to preserve his government. While Diem
obviously resented my frank talks earlier this year and will
probably resent even more suggestions outlined below, he has
apparently acted on some of our earlier suggestions and might act
on at least some of the following..." (Ibid, p- 2)

Limiting his recommendations to the political and economic sphere,
since other messages had dealt with security recommendations, Durbrow
suggested measures, including: ;

" | . . Rumors about Mr. and Mrs. Nhu are creating growing
dissension within country and seriously damage political posi-
tion of Diem Government. Whether rumors true or false,
politically important fact is that more and more people believe
them to be true. Therefore, becoming increasingly clear that
in interest Diem Government some action should be taken. In
analagous situations in other countries as important, useful
government personalities have had to be sacrificed for political
reasons. I would suggest therefore that President might appoint
Nhu to Ambassadorship abroad.

" . . . Similarly Tran Kim Tuyen, Nhu's henchman and Head of
Secret Intelligence Service, should be sent abroad in diplomatic
capacity because of his growing identification in public mind
with alleged secret police methods of repression and control."
(Ibid., p. 3)

" . . . One or two cabinet ministers from opposition should be
appointed to demonstrate Diem's desire to establish Government
of National Union in fight against VC.

" . . « Make public announcement of disbandment of Can Iao
Party or at least its surfacing, with names and positions of all
members made known publicly. Purpose this step would be to
eliminate atmosphere of fear and suspicion and reduce public
belief in favoritism and corruption, all of which party's semi-
covert status has given rise to.

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
