Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vv. “SUSTAINED REPRISAL” AND ITS VARTANTS -- ADVOCACY SHIFTS INTO HIGH GEAR
A. The McGeorge Bundy Recommendation

Pleiku, and the first FLAMING DART reprisel, caught the McGeorge
Bundy group (which also included Assistant Secretary of Defense John
McNaughton, White House Aide Chester Cooper, and Chairman of the Vietnam
Coordinating Group Leonard Unger) in the midst of intensive discussions
with the US Mission in Saigon. These discussions covered the whole range
of US-Vietnam policy options, particularly the complex issue of future
pressures on the North. Immediately following the reprisal decision of
February 7, the group returned to Washington via Air Force One. Enroute
and airborne, they drafted a memorandum to the President which was intended
to reflect in some degree the consensus reached among the Bundy group and
with the U.S. Mission in Saigon. 53/ But in an unmistakable way, the memo-
randum also represents a highly personal Bundy assessment and point of
view. For this reason, and because of its unique articulation of a
rationale for the ROLLING THUNDER policy, it is reproduced here in con-
siderable detail.

The Summary Conclusions, presented at the very outset of the
memorandum, set the tone of the more detailed elaboration that is to
follow:

The situation in Vietnem is deteriorating, and without new
U.S. action defeat appears inevitable -- probably not in a
matter of weeks or perhaps even months, but within the next
year or so. There is still time to turn it eround, but not
much.

The stakes in Vietnam are extremely high. The American
investment is very large, and American responsibility is a
fact of life which is palpable in the atmosphere of Asia, and
even elsewhere. The international prestige of the United
States, and a substantial part of our influence, are directly
at risk in Vietnam. There is no way of unloading the burden
on the Vietnamese themselves, and there is no way of negotiat-
ing ourselves out of Vietnam which offers any serious promise
at present. It is possible that at some future time a neutral
non-Communist force may emerge, perhaps under Buddhist leader-
ship, but no such force currently exists, and any negotiated
U.S. withdrawal today would mean surrender on the installment
plan.

The policy of graduated and continuing reprisal outlined
d in Annex A is the most promising course available, in my
judgment. Thet judgment is shared by all who accompanied me
from Washington, and I think-by all members of the country
team. :

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
