Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_ TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I told Firyubin I had asked to see him to put a very simple
question to him. Does the Soviet Government agree to transmit
the oral communication to the DRV? I said this was the whole
purpose of my visit. :

Firyubin said the DRV embassy had not put such 4 request
to the Soviet Government. I must agree that for Soviets to act
as intermediary between us and DRV is very unusual. Naturally
he would report my request to his Government and if the DRV
should request this service he would not exclude the possibility
of transmitting the communication to the DRV Government. Mean-
while he would be interested in knowing just how the DRV embassy
had responded to our approach.

I again described for Firyubin our efforts to deliver the
message to the DRV through its embassy in Moscow and told him
that the end result was a suggestion by the embassy that we
transmit the messege through the Soviet Government in its
capacity as Geneva Co-Chairman. Firyubin repeated his promise
to report my request to his Government and to inform me of the
results. '

While the conversation continued in this vein, Firyubin hed passed
a note to a Foreign Office: assistant, Kornienko, who attended him, and
the latter left the room. After some time, Kornienko reappeared and
hended a note to Firyubin, which the latter read carefully. After read-
ing the note, Firyubin said fletly thet the Soviet Government would not
transmit tae U.S. Government's message to the DRV; that the DRV embassy
hed not requested this service and thet it was the U.S. responsibility
to find a convenient way of passing the message. Kohler's account con-
tinues:

I said I wished to understand him correctly. Was he
rejecting my request to transmit the communication to the
DRY? .

He said this was a correct understanding of the Soviet
Government position. We must ourselves find the way.

I said thet what I was seeking was the cooperation of
the Soviet Government and Firyubin's remarks indicated
clearly that the Soviet Government was refusing this.
Firyubin said, "I em not a postman" and again said we could
find our own ways of transmitting messages.

I pointed out to Firyubin that the cooperation T had
requested is a well-known and not unprecedented process in
international diplomacy. I had great difficulty in recon-
ciling Soviet Government refusel to cooperate with its
declaration in support of peaceful settlement of disputed
questions.

.

119 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
