Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

its decisions. The controversy subsided in January with Junta assurance
that it would not use the law. There was considerable discussion within
USG circles as to how American influence should be disposed in supporting
presidential candidates. Marshall Ky was elready making noises about
running. Washington cautioned Saigon not to automatically oppose a Ky
candidacy. While State would prefer a civilian president, the most im-
portant matter was to effect transition to a constitutional government
that was strong and unified enough to continue to prosecute the war
‘effort (or negotiate a peaceful settlement) , “
---and at the same time broadly enough based to attract
increasing local and national political strength away
from VC. 38/

Ambassador Lodge's reply was, "the continued viebility of SVN depends very
heavily on the cohesiveness of the military." 39/ This had been and
remained his evaluation of the political situation.

---Unity of the miltary is essential to government sta-
bility in VN. From the standpoint of stability, this is
the Law and the Prophets.

Movement toward a broadly based, truly popular govermment
is impossible without stability.

The military is also the chief nation-building group in
the country. It has education, skills, experience, and
discipline which no other group can offer. 0/

State acquiesced in this argument but continued to hope for a government
broadly enough based s0 that the VC would find avenues to conaguest of
South Vietnam effectively blocked.

e+ein Our view it is less a question of any civilian can-
didate controlling the military and more a question of
the military being educated to accept a sharing of power
and responsibility with civilians as a necessary elementary
politicel progress. This means a readiness to accept the

‘ outcome of a free and open election in which the candidate
favored by the directorate may not win. 41/

9. Foreign Exchange Negotiations and the GVN Budget, January - March 1967

The problem of GVIi dollar balances remained a thorn, GVN did nothing
to carry out its November agreements. With scercely concealed impatience,
Ambassador Porter offered GV a tough economic program, in a meeting in
the first week of January, 1967, with special emchasis on the dollar
balances. Reporting on the meeting, he said:

hh TOP SECRET-Sensitive
