Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

: “SECRET

build-up, with RLG forces committed elsewhere, and increasing
infiltration into Vietnam is reported.
There is an intense psychological attack being waged against
Free Vietnam by the Communists. This not only includes an almost
constant barrage from powerful Radio Hanoi, which is reportedly
relayed from Cambodia and is received as a loud and clear signal
in South Vietnam, but also a heavy campaign by on-the-spot agitprop
agents. A part of the psychological attack is directed against Ameri-
cans, particularly against U.S. MAAG personnel, along the lines of
the Chinese Communist "hate America" campaign. I did not have
the time or means to assess the effect of this psychological attack
which has been going on for years.

‘The big city area of Saigon- Cholon undoubtedly is a beret of
Communist operations, although I was able to find out little about
either the Communist organization or its operations in this city area.
U.S, intelligence personnel believed that Vietnamese counter-intelli-
gence Organizations were so actively "hustling" s0O.many suspects
that the Communists have been unable to institute much of an organi-
zation, President Diem believed that the Communists were concentrating
their work elsewhere, following the dictum; "first the mountains, then
the countryside, and then the city.'' The attitude of Vietnamese and ’
U.S, officials reminded me of the French and Vietnamese officials in
Hanoi in 1953-54, who were so surprised later to discover that a
complete, block-by-block clandestine Communist apparatus existed
there. Ox of Filipinos and Americans who believed the Huks were
in central Luzon in 1950 and were so surprised when an entire
Comnrinist politburo was captured in the city of Manila. I believe
that the people in Saigon-Cholon have heen the target of considerable
subversive effort by the Communists and that it takes an in-place
organization, to carry this out,

Communist strength figures are difficult to determine due in
part to the different categories of personnel. I was able to get no
estimate ou the number of Communist political-psychological operators,
although the DRV reportedly have trained many for work in the south,
' Also, the Communist military personnel include regulars who have
infiltrated from the north, plus territorial forces and guerrillas who
.2pparently are recruited locally. Colonel Tranh Thien Khiem, who
commands the 5th Military Region, broke his estimate of some 7,000
Viet Cong military in his region into 3, 320 regulars, 1,170 territorials,
and 2,590 guerrillas. When the Vietminh trcops were transferred to
the north in 1954-55 under the Geneva Agreeme . many left families.

ae ae 5 mee me
