Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

13- NGUYEN TANG NGUYEN, M.D., former Minister of Labor and
Youth

14. PHAM HUU CHUONG, M.D., former Minister of Public Health
and Social Action

15. TRAN VAN TUYEN, Attorney at Law, former Secretary of State
for Information and Propaganda

16. TA CHUONG PHUNG, former Provincial Governor for Binh-Dinh

17. TRAN LE CHAT, laureate of the Triennial Mandarin Competi-
tion of 1903

18. HO VAN VUI, Reverend, former Parish Priest of Saigon, at
present Parish Priest of Tha-La, Province of Tay-Ninh

The November, 1960, coup marked the end of opposition by
professional politicians against Diem. In fact, all the Caravelle group
were arrested and jailed. Such political activity among them as occurred
in 1962 and 1963 was perforce subdued to the point that it captured atten-
tion neither from opponents of Diem, nor Diem himself. But 1960 was
altogether too late for effective “loyal opposition" to form. By that
time the GVN's ability to control the press, to manage demonstrations,
to limit travel, and to imprison (and worse) at will, had virtually
paralyzed the intellectual elite of Vietnam. Nor were labor unions
politically active, despite their power potential. As early as 1956
the GVN had become alarmed over Communist influence in rubber workers'
unions in Binh Duong Province, and had arrested union leaders. Farmers'
unions were crippled by arrests of union cadre, and the Can lao proved
itself quite capable of engineering elections within the unions as effec-
tively as it rigged those for the National Assembly. 9T/ The threat to Diem,
when it came, arose from more traditional sources of power -- the religious
sects and the armed forces.

4. Religious Dissenters

Diem's clash with the armed sects in 1954 and 1955 had the
unfortunate political consequence of casting his regime in religious over-
tones which deepened as the Ngo Dinh Catholicism became more widely known.
Together with Diem's obvious U.S. backing, these had the effect of accentu-
ating his Occidental, and especially American, identity. The British
Catholic writer and commentator on Vietnam, Graham Greene, observed in 1955
that:

"Tt is Catholicism which has helped to ruin the government
of Mr. Diem, for his genuine piety has been exploited by his
American advisers until the Church is in danger of sharing the
unpopularity of the United States. An unfortunate visit by

Wi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
