Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

reflect past, relatively small-unit, infantry-type operations under
the French; the inherently mobile infantry nature of the present
forces influenced by increased firepower; a capability for coor-
dinated operations up to division and eventually corps level; and
increased service and logistical support for the essentially
infentry-type forces. Mobility and increased infantry firepower
will dictate the utilization of essentially infantry tactics....
The VNA fri] adopt a highly mobile tactical doctrine character-
ized by extensive movement and maneuvering of the main body with
extensive mining and ambuscades, Pe

The preponderant evidence gleaned from ARVN experience against the Viet Cong
supports the hypothesis that ARVN tactics, influenced by the factors listed
above, rapidly evolved toward relatively large-scale operations, heavily
reliant on increased prepower including artillery and air support, and away
from “relatively small-unit, infantry-type operations," again reflecting
U.S. practice, if not U.S. doctrine, in countering large-scale aggression.

The concept and tactics of the pacification mission, unlike those
of countering aggression, required particular concentration on specialized
methods of dealing with the local populace as well as countering insurgents.
Thus the Saigon Military Mission reported that as a result of its teaching
efforts, re, :

Troops were courteous, they had constructed a school and were
holding classes for both children and adults with Army volunteers >
as teachers, they had helped rebuild the marketplace and church,
they carried out active patrolling, and they had placed locked
boxes to receive information and suggestions from the population.
People responded to the treatment. In a few days they started
being friendly with the troops (something usually reserved for
Communist troops in Asian countries) and, after a Viet Minh
hand-grenade attack on the marketplace, information about names
and locations of the Viet Minh cadres started to flow to the

24

Army from the people. 126

In spite of this apparent good start, MAAG Country Statements from 1955 to
1959 are silent on the subject of training for pacification, although
National Security Action, as pacification was then called, was actually
underway. This is a reasonably good indication of how important this set of
concepts and tactics was regarded by MAAG officers. 11¢/ Im fact, quite

the opposite was the case; MAAG reports constantly complained of the diver-
sion of the Vietnamese Army from unit training to pacification, without
suggesting that specialized training in the tactics of this mission might

be useful. [#$/ The clear inference is that the orthodoxy of U.S. tactical
doctrine prevailed. a s

hk, The organization of the defense establishment in general re-
flected the U.S. practices insofar as it was feasible to persuade the Diem

. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
: 25 :
