Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At the Pentagon, Systems Analysis sought measures of RVNAF effec-
tiveness in a comparison between the performances of Vietnamese end
American units in selected categories: vc/NVA KTA ratios, battalion
days of operations, days of enemy contact, number of operations, weapons
loss ratios, etc. Summarizing the results of some of these statistical
studies, Systems Analysis stated in September 1967:

Per man, Vietnamese forces were about half as effective
as U.S. forces in killing VC/IVA during the eleven months
(Aug 66 through Jun 67) for which detailed data are avail-
able. Effectiveness differs widely among Vietnamese units
of the same type and between wiits in differing parts of
the country. Poor leadership is the key reason for ineffic-
iency in most cases. 198/

The MACV staff rebutted many of the premises on which the statistical
comparisons had been based and again revealed the difficulty in develop-
ing meaningful statistical measures with respect to anything Vietnamese..
Their most telling criticism of the Systems Analysis comparison of U.S.
and Vietnamese units was the following:

(a) It is generally accepted that US maneuver battalions
have a combat effectiveness ratio of about 3:1 to RVNAF maneu-
ver battalions due to their greater unit firepower and depth
of combat support/ combat service support forces; RVNAF also
Jacks the mobility assets available to US units.

(b) Approximately one-third of the RVNAF maneuver
battalions are committed to direct support of Revolutionary
Development, a mission which constrains the overall poten-
tial to find, fix, and fight the enemy forces. In this
analysis an RVNAF unit that is 45 percent as effective as
US units which have three times the RVNAF combat effective-
ness would appear to be doing very well. In fact, anything
over 33 percent would reflect superior performance. 199/

But here again one can be misled. One reason that ARVN was given the

R/D support mission in the first place was its demonstrated inability

to engage effectively and destroy the enemy main force. R/D was regarded
as a residual and semi-passive role more suited to ARVN capabilities.

And so the statistical arguments raged, partisans marshalling whatever
statistics they could to defend what in most cases were their own pre-
conceived notions. :

All of this is not to imply that qualitative estimates, diagnoses,
prescriptions, and prognosis were lacking in 1967. At the Guam Conference
with the President, General Abrams’ appointment as the new Deputy COMUS-
MACV had been announced along with the others already mentioned and his
responsibility for overseeing the U.S. advisory effort with RVNAF re-
emphasized. Upon return to Saigon prior to his own departure, Lodge

105 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
