Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

coast for the possible evacuation of American dependents and civilians
if events required. 52/ ‘his was a re-enactment of a similar alert
during the abortive August coup.

In Washington, McNamara and the JCS had become concerned.about the
differing views of Lodge and Harkins as to the correct U.S. course of
action. 53/ More importantly, they were alarmed at the apparent break-
down of communication and coordination between the Ambassador and MACY.

The cable traffic tended “to form a picture of a relationship which lacks

the depth and continuity required by the complex circumstances in Saigon,"5)/
Harkins' suggestions for improving their rapport were invited. After the
NSC meeting on October 29, the White House was also concerned and instructed
Lodge to show Harkins the relevant cables and be sure he was fully aware

of the coup arrangements, since during Iodge's absence in Washington

Harkins would heve overall responsibility for the U.5. 55/

These two cables triggered a flurry of strong opposing reactions
from lodge and Herkins. Harkins, belatedly apprised of the recent Conein-
Don contacts and of Lodge's evaluations and recommendations, took bitter
exception to the Ambassador's conclusions in three separate cables on
October 30. He particularly resented Lodge's independent, gloomy assess-
ments of how the war was going, which were at direct odds with his ow
views, views which he had provided Lodge for inclusion in his weekly
reports to Washington. 57/ As to U.S. policy toward a coup, he was irate
at having been excluded by Lodge from information and consultation about
the continuing contacts with the generals. 58/ The heart of the issue,
however, was a disagreement about what was, in fact, U.S, policy toward
a coup as defined by the Washington guidance cables, Harkins outlined
the disagreement in a separate October 30 cable to Taylor;

There is a basic difference apparently between the Am-
bassador's thinking and mine on the interpretation of the
guidance contained in CAP 63560 dated 6 October (see Appen-
dix) and the additional thoughts, I repeat, thoughts expressed
in CAS Washington 74228 dated 9 October (Appendix). JI inter-
pret CAP 63560 as our basic guidance and that CAS 74228 being
additional thoughts did not chenge the basic guidance in that
no initiative should now be taken to give any active covert
encouragement to a coup. The Ambassador feels that 74228 does
change 63560 and that a change of government is desired and
feels as stated in CAS Saigon 1964 (Appendix) that the only
way to bring about such a change is by a coup.

I'm not opposed to a change in government, no indeed, but
I'm inclined to feel thet at this time the change should be in
methods of governing rather than complete change of personnel.
I have seen no batting order proposed by any of the coup groups.
I think we should take a hard look at any proposed list before
we make any decisions. In my contacts here I have seen no one

L7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
