Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to arms and would participate in guerrilla activities if so
ordered. The guerrillas are able to marshall a force of several
hundred men for major hit-and-run raids, as they demonstrated
twice during 1958. They have recently stepped up their intimida-
tion campaign, assassinating local officials in remote areas,
terrorizing local populations and disrupting government operations.
The dissident armed remnants of the religious sects are largely
broken up. About 2,000 such dissidents surrendered to the
government during 1958 and the few hundred remaining in the jungle
are probably now absorbed or dominated by the Communists.

"The government has been able to restrict but not eliminate
the subversive and espionage activities of clandestine Communist
agents. It is probable that Communists have penetrated some
local army and security units, village councils, and local
branches of the government. There is no evidence, however, that
such penetration is sufficient to hamper government operations
seriously or that it extends to the higher echelons of the
government. There is probably a widespread Communist underground
in the urban areas, especially Saigon, and Commmist intelligence
of GVN plans and activities is probably good. Communist agents
are also stimulating unrest among the tribal minorities in the
central highlands, a relatively inaccessible and sparsely popu-
lated area, which the government is attempting to settle and
develop, primarily for security reasons.

"South Vietnam's 136,000-man army, supported by the Civil
Guard, the Self-Defense Corps and the police services, is
capable of maintaining effective internal security except in
the most remote jungle and mountain areas. Until mid-1957, the
army had the primary responsibility for internal security, and
had considerable success. By that time major responsibility
for internal security had been given to the provincial Civil
Guard (48,000) and the village Self-Defense Corps (47,000).
These organizations have proven to be inadequately trained and
equipped for the job, and units from the armed forces have
continued to be called in to meet special situations. The size
and scattered distribution of the Civil Guard and Self-Defense
Corps add to the problems of training and equipping them and
of coordinating their activities. In some regions, they are
infiltrated by Communists. The police services, which include
the 7,500-man Vietnamese Bureau of Investigation and 10,500-
man police force stationed in the main cities, have had con-
siderable success in tracking down subversives and terrorists
and are developing into efficient organizations.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
23
