Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in 1946 and 1947, France and Britain were moving toward an anti-
Soviet alliance in Europe, and the U.S. was reluctant to press a
potentially divisive policy. The U.S. considered the fate of Viet-
namese nationalism relatively insignificant compared with European
economic recovery and collective security from communist domination.

Tt is not as though the U.S. was not prepared to act in circum-
stances such as these. For example, in the 1945-1946 dispute over
Dutch possessions in Indonesia, the U.S. actively intervened against
its Dutch ally. In this case, however, the intervention was in con-
cert with the U.K. (which steadfastly refused similar action in Indo-
china) and against the Netherlands, a much less significant ally in
Europe than France. In wider company and at projected lower cost, the
U.S. could and did show.a determination to act against colonialism.

The resultant U.S. policy has most often been termed "neutrality."
It was, however, also consistent with the policy of deferring to French
volition announced by President Roosevelt's Secretary of State on
3 April 1945. It was a policy characterized by the same indecision
that had marked U.S. wartime policy. Moreover, at the time, Indochina
appeared to many to be one region in the troubled postwar world in
which the U.S. might enjoy the luxury of abstention.

In February, 1947, early in the war, the U.S. Ambassador in Paris
was instructed to reassure Premier Ramadier of the "very friendliest
feelings" of the U.S. toward France and its interest in supporting
France in recovering its economic, political and military strength:

"In spite any misunderstanding which might have arisen
in minds French in regard to our position concerning Indochina
they must appreciate that we have fully recognized France's
sovereign position in that area and we do not wish to have
it appear that we are in any way endeavoring undermine that
position, and French should know it is our desire to be helpful
and we stand ready assist any appropriate way we can to find
solution for Indochinese: problem. At same time we cannot
shut our eyes to fact that there are two sides this problem
and that our reports indicate both a lack French understanding
of other side (more in Saigon than in Paris) and continued
existence dangerously outmoded colonial outlook and methods
in area. Furthermore, there is no escape from fact that trend
of times is to effect that colonial empires in XIX Century
sense are rapidly becoming thing of past. Action Brit in India
and Burma and Dutch in Indonesia are outstanding examples this
trend, and French themselves took cognizance of it both in new
Constitution and in their agreements with Vietnam. On other
hand we do not lose sight fact that Ho Chi Minh has direct
Communist connections and it should be obvious that we are
not interested in seeing colonial empire administrations sup-
planted by philosophy and political organizations emanating
from and controlled by Kremlin....

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
A-h a ase
