Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREL - Sensitive

A considerable part of the rationale within the CIP
-- including one long annex -- was devoted to justifying the enlarged
force level for RVNAF, emphasizing that action must be taken to
implement the increase as quickly as possible, since from one to two
years would be required to fill the new units- It could be foreseen
that those who saw the Viet Cong threat as most important (which was
the basic tone of the CIP, and subsequently of the DOD), and who
regarded military measures against this threat as most urgent,
including measures that would require increased acceptance and coopera~
tion by Diem, would be impatient with "pressure tactics when they
involved delays on "vital" military matters in the hope Or weaning
concessions fron Diem in political areas that seemed peripheral or
trivial in the context of the communist insurgency:

A factor tipping the scales toward what might be
ealled the Diem/MAAG/DOD apiorivice in each instance was the coincident,
and increasing, need to "reassure" Diem of U-S- support for eahae
and for him personally, in the light of events that had shaken = .
assurance (and hence, Diem's willingness to cooperate On less contro
versial measures) such as, in Diem's eyes, U.S. involvement in — ‘
abortive November 1960 coup, U.S. pressures via Durbrow for BS seh
reforms, and, above all, U.S. policy with respect to 1aos- This nee
to reassure Diem was at cross purposes with the use of pressure
tactics to influence him and, in part, conflicted with ala
desire to have Diem adopt moves (such as delegating authority ae ee
single military commander, or include oppositionists in his po tne
that he regarded as directly threatening continuation of his rule.

ce. Presidential Action on the Cir

fee tent iat 2h

Ten days after President Kennedy's inauguratton, ris

30 January 1961, a memo from the President to the Secretary of State
and Secretary of Defense noted that as a result of a meeting on
28 January he had authorized:

" . . . an increase of expenditure of $28.4 pede oa
Acvend the Wetelen Pores tyes by conrad: Sees Ones
expenditure of $12.7 million for a program to improve the quality
of the Viet-Nam civil guard." *

These figures represented the dollar costs of the acuaneet, Some
in the CIP. In passing on this authorization from the Bread ent in a
Joint State-Defense-ICA message, the Department pointed out:

* ‘The author, Benjamin» : Recent
* The author, Benjamin Bock, of the State Department Study:
: Concerning Vietnam 1960-1963, Research

American Policy and Diplomac ;

See Ea6, vanuaty 1G, notes That Chalmers V. Wood, the Vietnamese
desk officer in the 1961 period, had told him in June 1963 that President
Kennedy had personally approved the Counterinsurgency Plan.

25: TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
