Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. Opening Bids on Advice, Teverage, and AID, April-May, 1964

Armed with our declaration of support and with the promised further
material assistance, General Khanh signed a mobilization decree on April 4;
at the time the decree satisfied the USG as meeting McNamara's recommenda-
tion on the subject. 5h/ However, Khanh delayed signing implementing
decrees for the mobilization decree indefinitely; and it has never become
clear whet it would have meant, if implemented. In May, Khanh purportedly

broadened the draft to include older and younger men, and announced forma-

tion of a new "Civil Defense Corps"; but neither came to anything. On April 4,
Khanh also abolished the Council of Notables. This latter step he did on

his own, without prior discussion with Lodge. As noted in section 1, Lodge,
who always believed in the need and importance of constitutional government

in SVN, felt no urgency for creating a democratic form of government, al-
though many in State may heave wanted to object to Khanh's actions. 55/

Such actions without prior consultation were to become a sore point later

on with both State and the Embassy. Thus, what the USG actually got for

the recognition and material support it gave Khanh in March was the disso-
Jution of the Council of Notables. 56/

During April, Lodge and State continued to debate how hard to ‘
push GVN using ATID leverage. lodge agreed with the general principle that
the Commercial Import Program (CIP) should not be increased until increased
GVN expenditures gquickened the economy and drove imports up. However,
he noted that GVN had been given to understand that they could expect
at least the $95 million CIP in 196) that Diem had in 1963, and that
McNamara had said in Saigon and Washington that U.S. assistance to Vietnam
would increase by about $50 million. These assurances had spurred Oanh,
Minister of National Economy, to ask for specific increases in CIP. Lodge
thought the time unpropitious for detailed joint planning and for austerity
measures as conditions for the last increment of 1964 CIP, Oanh received
eredit for being too busy with pacification planning and other matters
to discuss such matters. Therefore, Lodge proposed to use the planning
of the CY 1965 program as the right place to apply leverage. 57/

State reacted sharply, questioning whether the USG should let
GVN off the hook on its March commitments that easily. Nevertheless,
State acknowledged that "formal negotiations may not be desirable at this
time," and settled instead for "constant dialogue to keep GVN aware of
U.S. adhererice to the new approach and of firm desire to see it implemented."
The desired GVN actions included drawdown of foreign exchange reserves,

promotion of exports, import austerity, and an anti-inflationary domestic

policy. 58

USOM then talked to Oanh shout the commitments on the two sides.
USOM felt that Oanh understood that GVN was to move first and be backed
up by the USG as needed, but thought that some segments of GVN were dragging
their heels to avoid living up to their commitments. USOM estimated a
$15-30 million drawdown of GVN foreign exchange reserves in 196}. 59/

In the last week of April, General Khanh asked Lodge for one
American expert each in the fields of Finance-Eeonomics, Foreign Affairs,

17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
