Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. The other broad alternative is to increase his present
forces by some amount varying from less than his figure of
205,000 and ranging up to the full amount. Also in this case,
we might well consider giving him revised strategic guidance
in the light of what we have learned from the Tet offensive
and its sequel.

General Taylor thus indicated that in the reassessment of our strategy,
the government would be required to answer the following questions:

(1) Do we decide at this time to send any additional
reinforcements to General Westmoreland?

(2) If the answer is affirmative, should we agree to
send all or part of the 205,000 requested by General
Westmoreland?

(3) Whether the response is affirmative or negative, should
we send General Westmoreland new strategic guidance, hoping to
limit further demands on U.S. military manpower?

(4) What Strategie Reserve should be retained in the U.S.
in the foregoing situations?

General Taylor then listed some of the political considerations of the
military course of action decided upon. He listed the following political
actions as worth considering in connection with any decision on reinforce-

ment:

(1) A renewed offer of negotiation, possibly with a private
communication that we would suspend the bombing for a fixed period
without making the time limitation public if we were assured that
productive negotiations would start before the end of the period.

(2) A public announcement that we would adjust the bombing
of the North to the level of intensity of enemy ground action
in the South.

(3) As a prelude to sharply increased bombing levels, possibly
40 include the closing of Haiphong, a statement of our intentions
made necessary by the enemy offensive against the cities and
aeross the frontiers.

(4) Announcement of the withdrawal of the San Antonio
formula in view of the heightened level of aggression conducted

by North Viet-Nam.

(5) Keep silent.

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
