Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

facts, we need 2 to 3 months to get any sort of
government going which has any chance of being
able to maintain order in the cities and to con-
tinue the pacification efforts of past levels.
There is no present urge to march north...the
leadership is exhausted and frustrated...and

not anxious to take on any new problems or
obligations. Hence, there is no need to hasten
our plans to satisfy an impatience to close with

the enemy... 127/

7 —.0n 4 Seytenber the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for :
International Security Affairs, Peter Solbert, forwarded to the Secretary
of Defense a memorandum including a set of summary recommendations for a
program of overall social development called "stability for the GVN."
Copies of this memorandum were seen by both Vance and McNamara, but
there is no documentary evidence that it was given serious consideration.
The program was based on a longer RAND study by C. J. Zwick, and it
proposed a series of measures to broaden popular support of the Govern-~
ment of Vietnam. The measures were divided into an Urban Program and

@ Rurel Program. Summarily, under the Urban Program, there were six
major areas of development:

1. a reduction of consumer prices for selected commodities;

2. an inerease in government salaries;

3- mass low cost public housing;

k. urban public works;

Dd. expanded educational programs; and

6. an improved business climate to foster private business.
Under the proposed Rural Program there were four items;

1. an elimination of corvée labor and provision for paid
public works;

2. subsidized credit to peasants under GYN control;

3- an increase in military pay and benefits; and

4, educational assistance to rural youths.
This memorandum further suggested that involving in the program the
leaders of the various political factions in Vietnam wno were currently

causing trouble would indirectly enlist them in what amounted to
stabilizing efforts, and the current plague of factionalism might be

reduced. 128/ i
96

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
