Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

sometine about what it was the U.S, wanted him to do. UGA The atmosphere
of this meeting must have been strained in the extreme in view of Lodge's
awareness of the imminence of the coup. After the meeting, Felt went
straight to the airport and held a press conference, with a nervous
General Don at his side, before departing al noon unawere of the drama
that was already unfolding.

While Lodge and Felt had been at the palace, coup units had already
begun to deploy in and eround Saigon. At the same time, nearly all the
generals and top officers had been convened for a noon meeting at JCS
headquarters at Tan Son Hhut. ‘There the coup comuittee informed them
that the coup had begun and asked for their support. Pledges of support
Were recorded on tape by all those present who supported the action,

They were to be used later over the radio and would implicate the entire
senior officer corps of the Army in the event the coup failed. In this
way the plotters were able to enlist the support of several wavering
officers. ‘he only senior officers not present were Generals Dinh end Cao,
who were not informed of the meeting to prevent their revealing the coup
prematurely to the palace or taking counter action. Also not present was
the South Vietnamese Chief of Naval Operations, who had been assassinated
by a trigger-happy escort enroute. Several officers suspected of being
loyal to Diem were taken into immediate custody at JGS, including Colonel
Tung, and the commanders of the Air Force, the airborne brigade, the
Marines, the Civil Guard, and the police force. A CAS officer, pre-
sumably It Colonel Conein, was also invited to ccme to JGS and was
authorized to maintain telephone contact with the limbassy during the
coup. He provided reliable reporting throughout the next two days.

At 1:45 p.m., Don called General Stilwell, Harkins' J-3, and informed
him that all the generals were assembled at JGS and thet the coup had
begun, 8/ At the same time, coup forces were seizing the post office
with its telecommunications facilities, the police headquarters, the
radio stations, the airport, and the naval headquarters, and were deploy-
ing in positions to assault the special forces headquarters near Tan
Son Nhut, the palace, and the barracks of the palace guard. Other units
had been deployed in blocking positions to defend against any loyal
counterattack from units outside Saigon. These actions were swift and
met with little resistance, The units involved included the Marine and
airborne units under the leadership of junior officers, the Air Force
under Junior officers, and units from the 5th Division under orders from
Dinh, who had thrown in his lot when he became aware of the unanimity of
the senior officers and their apparent likelihood of success. Later in
the day, armor and troops from the 7th Division at My Tho, under the
insurgent leadership of Colonel Co, arrived for the essault on the palace.

As is always the case in this kind of erisis, the quantity of cables
quickly overwhelmed the conmunications system, and the incompleteness of
the reports meant that no clear picture of what was happening could be
pieced together until later. As in all such situations, the Embassy
became an islend linked to outside events only by tenuous reports from
telephone contacts.

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
