Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1. A vigorous, imaginative and flexible prosecution
of the wer within acceptable limits.

2. Through free and honest elections establishing a
broadly based stable, functioning, constitutional govern-
ment.

3. An expedited pacification program which will win
the allegiance of the Vietnamese people including the Viet
Cong, and which offers them the opportunity to become part
of the social fabric of the country.

4, Reorientation of the mission of the Vietnamese
Armed Forees and their revitalization with inereased emphasis
on improvement and quality.

5. The optimum use of available manpower.
6. Economic stability and development. 54/
He was basically optimistic about the progress of the military war:

_ Ina series of splendidly executed offensive opera-
tions undertaken by General Westmoreland since late April
in which a total of over 12,000 of the enemy have been
killed in action, the enemy has been kept off balance and
his time schedule has been disrupted. It seems apparent
that the main effort of the enemy to achieve his summer
campaign objectives has been postponed from May at least
until July. General Westmoreland's strategy of antici-
pating enemy threats has paid off handsomely and is one
which he intends to continue in view of what he foresees
as an intensification of enemy attempts to achieve his
summer campaign objectives.

An encouraging element of these recent Operations
-has been evidence of increased effectiveness of the Viet-
namese Armed Forces. In a number of heavy engagements
throughout the country ARVN units have turned in highly
creditable performances. They contributed materially to
the success of the initial operations in the DMZ, killing
342 enemy with a loss of only 31 of their own forces. In
a total of 14 other cperations in the I Corps area during
the past six weeks, ARVN units accounted for 1,400 enemy
killed in action. In the II Corps area they also have
given a good account of themselves and recently in the Delta

198 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
