(2)

(3)

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

which is the principal element, counts 1,500 in the north, 3,000
in the center, and 5,000 in the south and has influence amongst
business men, officials, and intellectuals.

The Vietnam Patriots' Party (Viet Nam Ai Quoc Dang), made up of
doctors, lawyers and intellectuals in the liberal professions
and having latent power among young intellectuals.

The National Socialist Party (Dai Viet Quoc Xa), having about
2000 members and its chief sphere of influence in the light
industry towns of Haiphong and Hanoi. This party was directed
by Tran Trong Kim, late premier of the Bao Dai government, and
is said to have been inspired by the Japanese Military Police
and Intelligence Organization (Kempei Tai) to recruit Vietnamese
for the puppet military forces. 19

In Cochinchina, the Restoration League was preeminent:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(7)

Restoration League

a a Tan Whon. Some of the elements of the dissolved Vietnam
Revolutionary Party (Viet Nam Cach Menh Dang), which had been
founded in 1939, joined the new organization. The Party was
markedly pro-Japanese in orientation. It favored collaboration
with the Japanese Army and the adherence of EOC to the
Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.

The Vietnam Patriots' Party (Viet Nam Ai Quoc Dang), a group
of intellectuals and students.

The Great Vietnam Nationalist Party (Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang),
an outgrowth of the Cochinchina Vietnam am Nationalist eye
consisting of pro-Japanese elements.

“The Vietnam National Party (Viet Nam Quoc Gia Dang), a minor

political group.

The Youth Justice Association (Thanh Nhien Nghia Dong Doan),
a minor youth group.

The Youth Patriots (Thanh Nhien Ai Quoc), the southern branch
of a terrorist youth group. Elements of this southern group
created an organization known as the Vietnam Democratic Party
(Viet Nem Dan Chu Ngia Dang).

The Hoa Hao Buddhist Sect (Phat Giao Hoa Hao), also known as
the Vietnam Independence Restoration Party (Viet Nam Doc Lap
Van Dang), a militant Buddhist sect led by Huynh Phu So.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-2h
