Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Iv. OCO to CORDS
A. OCO on Trial: Introduction

With the cable exchange completed, except for a few minor matters,
Ambassador Lodge announced the formation of the Office of Civil Opera-
tions on November 26, 1966 -- one month after the original go-ahead
signal had been given in Washington, and three weeks after the cable to
Lodge telling him that the President wanted rapid action. While delays
of this kind are common in government and do not normally affect events,
in this case the delay got OCO off to a visibly slow start despite the
fact thet the President had clearly indicated to Lodge and Porter that
he was putting OCO on trial and would review its accomplishments in a
fairly short time.

The reasons for the Mission's slow start revealed again just how
far apart Washington and its representatives in Saigon were in their
philosophy and approach to the war.

Washington officials consistently underestimated the difficulty of
the actions they wanted the Mission to do, and continually expected move-
ment at speeds literally beyond the capability of the Mission. They held
these ambitious expectations and exerted pressure accordingly -- not
primarily because of the situation in the pacification program in South
Vietnam (which was fairly static), but because of growing pressure from
the public, the press, and Congress for visible progress in the war,
because of growing American domestic dissatisfaction with the course of
the war. If the American public could not see progress in Vietnam, the
support the Administration had for the war would drop steadily.

In its efforts to show progress some members of the Administration
were continually interpreting statistics and events in the most favorable
light possible, and its critics -- particularly the press -- were inter-
preting the same events in the most unfavorable light possible. Since
events in Vietnam were usually open to at least two different interpreta-
tions, the gap between the Administration and its critics over the basic
question of How are We Doing? grew steadily during 1966 and 1967. But
beyond the disagreements over facts and statistics, there was a contimal
effort by Washington officials to prod Saigon forward at a faster pace.
Thus,.if the Mission had just started a crash program at the highest speed
ever achieved by the Mission, Washington officials, particularly Komer,
acting (he said) in the President's name, would demand that the Mission
redouble its efforts again. Komer, in a reflective moment, called it
“creative tensivn."

The Saigon Mission responded to this pressure with resistance and
hostility towards its Washington "backstops." When warned, for example,
thet the President was giving OCO 90 to 120 days to prove itself, Lodge
and Porter both shot back pointed comments to the effect that this was
an inadequate time period, and at the end of it results would probably

oe) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
