2s

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The agencies involved -- ATID, USIA, and CIA -~ were hostile

to the new designation from the outset. Since every agency
paid lip-service to the new role of the Deputy Ambassador,

it is difficult to document this fact. But it is virtually
self-evident: since every agency was being told that its
chief representative in Saigon now worked for the Deputy
Ambassador, a career Foreign Service Officer, there was un-
happiness with the system in both Saigon and Washington.
Men like the Director of JUSPAO, who had served in Vietnam
since January of 1964, and the CIA Station Chief, who re-
tained a completely independent communications channel to
Washington, were not going to yield any portion of their
autonomy without some quiet grumbling and invisible foot-
dragging. To overcome this reluctance was not as easy for
Porter as Washington had perhaps hoped, particularly in
light of Lodge's attitude.

The Washington organization did not parallel the Saigon
structure it was supposed to support, and in fact actually

prevented strong and continuous support. With legitimate
legal and treditional responsibilities for programs overseas,

each agency in Washington was understandably reluctant to
channel their guidance through the Deputy Ambassador, whose
authority did not seem to be derived from the normal letter
of authority to all Chiefs of Mission sent by President
Kennedy in 1961. The agencies, moreover, also had a special
problem with regard to Vietnam: Congress was being far more
rigorous in its review of the Vietnam program than it was in
most other areas. The Moss Subcommittee on Overseas Govern-
mental Operations, for example, was sending investigating
teams to Saigon regularly, and issuing well-publicized reports
criticizing the AID program across a broad front. The Sena-
torial group that reviews CIA programs was showing considerable
concern with the nature and size of the cadre and counter-
terror programs. And beyond that, there was the normal budge-
tary process, in which each agency generally handles its own
requests through an extremely complex and difficult process.
Bach agency was bound to try to communicate as directly as
possible with their representatives in Saigon. Thus, while
some major conflicting policies which had previously existed
were ironed out through the new system (such as the role of
the cadre), many smaller, or second-level matters contained
to receive the traditional separate agency approach.

A good exemple of this was the vital issue of improving village/hamlet

government. Although consistently identified as a key element in any

successful pacification program, improving the war-torn village structure
seemed to escape the Mission organizationally. Responsibility for advice
and assistance to the GVN Ministry of Interior (later the Commissariat for

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
