Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

5. Village Government

A further example of Diem's maladroitness was his abolishing
elections for village councils, a step he took in June, 1956, apparently
out of concern that large numbers of former Viet Minh might win office at
the village level. 69/ The Vietnamese village had traditionally, even
under the French, enjoyed administrative autonomy, and the village council
was a coterie of prominent residents who were the government in most simple
civic matters, adjudicating disputes, collecting taxes, and managing public
funds. Under the national regulation of 1956, members of council and the
village chief became appointive officials, and their offices subject to
scrutiny by the Diemist apparatus. The results were again a thrusting
forward of Northern Catholics, city dwellers, or other non-local trustees
of the GVN, to assume control at the key political level of South Vietnam,
to handle fiscal matters, and to manage the communal lands. For the same
reasons that the villagers had mistrusted the Civic Action cadre, they
found the GVN officials strange, and not a little incomprehensible. Also,
since these officials were the creatures of the province chief's, corruption
at the province level -- then, as in recent years, not uncommon -- was
transmittea directly to the village. Dang Duc Khoi, a young nationalist
who rose to become Diem's press officer, and then turned against hin,
regarded Diem's decision to abolish the village councils his vital error:

"Even if the Viet Minh had won some elections, the danger
of doing away with the traditional system of village election
was even greater. This was something that was part of the Viet-
namese way of life, and the. concept should have been retained
without interfering with Diem's legitimate desire -- indeed, his
need -- for a strong central government. The security problem
existed, but it wouldn't have made much difference if the Viet
Minh had elected some village chief's -- they soon established
their own underground governments anyway. Diem's mistake was in
paralyzing himself. He should have adopted a more intelligent
and persuasive policy and concentrated at the outset on obtaining the
support of the people. In that way, he could have properly challenged
the Viet Minh." 70/

Thus, Ngo Dinh began, in 1956, to place the "security problem" ahead of
rural revolution.

6. The Anti-Communist Campaign

Indeed, vocal anti-communism became more central to Diem's
rural programs than land reform. Like the Can Lao Party, the GVN borrowed
heavily from communist technique in combating the Viet Minh and their
residual influence -- urged on, in some instances at least, by their
American advisers. In the summer of 1955, the government launched an
Anti-Communist Denunciation Campaign, which included a scheme for classi-
fying the populace into lettered political groups according to attitude
toward the Viet Minh, and village ceremonies similar to communist

27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
