Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and about 11 tough regiments of the North Vietnamese Army.
That is at least twice as many enemy troops as there were at
the start of last year, despite the major United States
build-up since then.

"This does not mean that the American build-up has been
futile: the build-up was all that saved South Vietnam, in
the view of most experts. It does mean that no way has yet
been found to prevent the enemy from matching an American
build-up with a build-up of his own.

"About 200,000 American troops are now in South Vietnam
along with 550,000 South Vietnamese armed men, of whom about
half are well-trained army troops.

"American and South Vietnamese military officers have
asked for more American troops, requesting a force of about
400,000 men by the end of 1966, Not all of this strength
has been promised by President Johnson, but major reinforce-
ments are already in the offing...

"But while 1966 will be an important year militarily,
one in which all generals assume that there will be bloodier
fighting, it will also be a year of increased emphasis on
the subtle political and social aspects of the struggle.

"the Honolulu conference will in fact concentrate
largely on economic, social and political problems,
according to informed sources.

"Tt is felt in Saigon, however, that the Johnson
Administration cannot, even with the best of intentions,
guarantee the allegiance of the Vietnamese to their Govern-
ment merely by pumping more money and technical skill into
South Vietnem to give people the 'better life' of which
officials speak.

"At least 20 to 25 per cent of the country's area is
so firmly in control of the Vietcong guerrillas that no civic
and political programs are possible there at all. Other
large areas are so sharply contested that for the time being
pacification and rural-improvement workers cannot operate.

"Thus, rural-pacification work in 1966 is to be concen-
trated in one-third or fewer of the rural hamlets that the
Goverment already claims to control. The limitation implies
an admission that after five years of war the allies are
starting from scratch in this field, and that progress mst

be slow.

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
