Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. Honolulu
A. The Conference - February 1966

The details of the closed meetings at Honolulu do not appear, in
retrospect, to be nearly as important on the future emphasis on pacifi-
cation as the mere fact that the public statements of all participants
carried forward the theme that had been enunciated in the Declaration.
This may often be true of conferences; it certainly appears true of
this one, which was convened hastily and took place without any prepara-
tory staff work on either side of the Pacific. In addition, the political
upheavals in the spring of 1966, which followed the conference closely,
contributed to a reduction in the importance of the details of the con-
ference as it related to pacification.

Pacification was discussed frequently during the closed sessions.
The first time came during the plenary session, when Ambassador Lodge
delivered his statement to the President,

Speaking before a large andience which included General Thieu and
Air Vice Marshal Ky, Lodge made a general statement about what he called
"the subterranean war," and then discussed the four National Priority
Areas which the GVN and the U.S, had established in October 1965:

"J would like to begin by saying that the successes and
the sacrifices of the military, both the Vietnamese and the
American military, have created a fresh opportunity to win
the so-called ‘subterranean war'...

"...We can beat up North Vietnamese regiments in the high
plateau for the next twenty years and it will not end the war
-- unless we and the Vietnamese are able to build simple but
solid political institutions under which a proper police can
function and a climate created in which economic and social
revolution, in freedom, are possible.

"The GVN has organized itself to do this job and you will
hear a presentation by General Thang, who is in charge. The
American contribution consists of training and equipping of
personnel; advice; and material...

"Four priority areas have been chosen. Three are places
of great importance and difficulty. The ‘ourth is largely
pacified and is the place where they want to get the economic
and social development program going. We think the areas are
well chosen. The three tough ones are close to the Vietnamese
and American armies which means that the military presence
helps pacification. And, as pacification gets going, it im-

- proves the base for the military.

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
