Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. You should make clear that Hanoi is most likely to
denounce the project and thus free our hand after a short period.
Nonetheless, we might wish to continue the limitation even after
a formal denunciation, in order to reinforce its sincerity and
put the monkey firmly on Hanoi's back for whatever follows. Of
course, any major military change could compel full-scale
resumption at any time.

e. With or without denunciation, Hanoi might well feel
limited in conducting any major offensives at least in the northern
areas. If they did so, this could ease the pressure where it is
most potentially serious. If they did not, then this would give
us @ Clear field for whatever actions were then required.

d. In view of weather limitations, bombing north of the 20th
parallel will in any event be limited at least for the next four
weeks or so -- which we tentatively envisage as a maximum test-
ing period in any event. Hence, we are not giving up anything
really serious in this time frame. Moreover, air power now used
north of 20th can probably be used in Laos (where no policy change
planned) and in SVN.

e. Insofar as our announcement foreshadows any possibility
of a complete bombing stoppage, in the event Hanoi really exercises
reciprocal restraints, we regard this as unlikely. But in any
case, the period of demonstrated restraint would probably have to
continue for a period of several weeks, and we would have time to
appraise the situation and to consult carefully with them before
we undertook any such action.

Thus, in reassuring our allies of our “continued resolve", the cable
clearly indicated that not very much was expected of this change in policy.
Tt could possibly reinforce our sincerity and "put the monkey on Hanoi's
back for whatever follows." It was not expected thet Hanoi would react
positively although they might "feel limited in conducting any major
offensives at least in the northern areas", admittedly a highly dubious

likelihood.

What, then,was the purpose of this change in policy? If it was not
expected that Hanoi would respond positively, or that any other mejor
military benefits would accrue, what then was expected? The answer to
these questions, of course, could only be speculation at the time,

i although many of the answers were to be contained in the President's

speech on 31. Merch.

79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
