Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF SECURITY INFORMATION
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.

eo

=

Subject: The Navarre Concept for Operations
in Indochina.

i. En a memorandum for you, dated Il August 1955, subject:
"The Navarre Concept for Operations in Indochina,” the Joint
Chiefs or Staff commented on the Navarre concept and its
"promise of success’. It is understood that the Secretary

- of Defense contemplates sending a copy of the reference memo-
randum to the Secretary of State in the immediate future under
cover of a memorandum (Enclosure) which was passed informally
to.-the Chairman, Joins Chiefs of Staff, for comment by the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2. Though the Joint Chiefs of Staff remain in general .
agreement with the memorandum of 11 August, it is believed
that certain changes therein are appropriate prior to for-
warding it to the Secretary of State. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff consider the second sentence of paragrapn 3 to be
overly optimistic with respect to the "promise of success’
offered vy the Navarre concept. Though vigorous military
prosecution in Indochina and political support of the Navarre
concept in France are fundamental, it is believed a basic
requirenent ,for militnry suecess in Indochina is one of
creating: a political climate in that country which will pro-
vide the Incentive for natives to wholeheartedly support the
French and supply them with adequate intelligence vital to
the successful conduct of military operations in that country.

a
ar

‘

3. In furtherance of the O'Daniel Mission the Joint Chiefs
of: Staff are receiyvin, Pro_ress Reports from Indochina. A ot
report dated 24 August 1953 states that the Irench are not
in fact pursuing agreements reached between General OG'Daniel

vfs

re)

and General Navarre (including the Navarre concept) as vigor- oe
ously as expected by General O'Daniel and contemplated by him g

in nts veport. Spe cifically, General mpanmei in his at -
August Progress Report, states that (a) the French have “no “s
plans for a general fall offensive beyond limited objective £

i

yep Co
! Copy__ Pa ar wige eepies otch 1 se Nett ere 4
eae ee ne ee SEGURITY INEORRATION

‘i -
WLS pra My Hee Wish, ZO aS SG feo

Vonathnf Corie No.

