Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

-.» SECRET
= SECURITY INFORMATION

He said it was clear that it was futile and a mistake to defend
Indochina in Indochina, He said we could not have another Korea,
He said it was also true we could not put ground forces in Indochina,
We do not have them and we could not afford to immobilize such
‘forces as we had. He said we could take air and naval action, now-
ever, and had discussed whether this should be confined to approaches,

He concluded that our only hope was of changing the Chinese mind.
He said that we could strike where it hurts China or we could set up
@ blockade against trade. He said we had concluded that our mission
would not be to destroy the Communist regime. He also said that we
fully realized the danger of bringing the USSR into the show,

The Secretary concluded that there was no point in getting our
military people into any talks, He said we must get political decisions
first, He said that if firm decisions could not be reached that we _
perhaps could reach tentative decisions. He said that it had been
clear at Paris that he was somewhat “ahead of the play" while the
French and the British had urged us to discuss these matters and
had wanted discussions before decisions were made, When the
question actually came up, they were not ready to talk,

The Secretary remarked that Mr, Letourneau had said in Paris
that the military talks had reached some decision as to how to
evacuate the wounded, etc,., in the event of difficulites. He said
that our Navy had talked to Mr. Letourneau regarding port sizes,
capacity of ships, etc., with regard to evacuation.

Sir Oliver said he thought he understood the point, would report
back to London and would let us know if there were anything further
on it.

Mr. Acheson said that if his analysis were wrong and the British
Chiefs of Staff had any different one, he would be glad to hear of it,

SECRET... --
—
SECURETY INFORMATION
oe ‘i

516
