Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

25, President Kennedy's News Conference, June 14, 1962, Public Papers
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, p. Loe; ‘

"Mansfield's Criticisms

"OQ: Mr. President, Senator Mansfield a few days ago suggested a
review of Far Eastern policies because he said they seem to him either
marking time, or at least on a collision course.

"No you think such a review is necessary?

"THE PRESIDENT: Well, we have been reviewing. As you know, we have
been attempting in the case of Laos to work out a policy which would pre-
vent either one of those situations, whether we shall be successful or
not, only time will tell.

"T know that we have put large sums of money, and the situation there
is still hazardous, what is true there of course is true all around the
world. This is a period of great tension and change. But if the United
States had not played 2 part in Southeast Asia for many years, I think the
whole map of Southeast Asia would be different.

"T am delighted, as you know, I have the highest regard for Senator
Mensfield, end I think that we should constantly review, and I think that
he suggested we should make judgments between what is essential to our
interest and what is marginal. We have been attempting with great diffi-
culty to carry out a policy with Leos which would permit a neutral and
independent government there, and in Senator Mansfield's speech he used
the examples of Burma and Cambodia. Those were the examples that were
also used at the Vienna meeting by Chairman Khrushchey and myself in which
we stated the kind of government that we both said we hoped would emerge
in Laos. That is the commitment that was made by the Soviet Union, and
by the United States.

"Now we have-moved to a different plateau, and we are going to see
whether that commitment can be meintained. But on the other hand, I am
sure and I know Senator Mansfield would no? think we should withdraw,
because withdrawal in the case of Vietnam and in the case of Thailand
might mean a collapse of the entire area."

2. U.S. Comments on Report of Control Commission for Viet-Nem, Depart-

ment of State Bulletin, July 16, 1962, p. 109:

ee

"Department Statement

"the report just issued by the International Control Commission for
Viet-Nem demonstrates that the Communist North Vietnamese are engaged in
a campaign of aggression and subversion aimed at the violent overthrow of
the Government of South Viet-lNam. It indicates clearly that the hostilities

. .

C-24
