Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

working relations with those forces." 36/ The concept of a military
assistance advisory group had also been approved, although the President
did not refer to MAAG in his public statement. 37/ Also, in June,
following the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Southeast
Asia Aid Policy Committee was established.

e. Erskine Mission

The military mission dispatched by the President and headed
by Major General Graves B. Erskine, USMC, arrived in Saigon on July 15,
and reported its findings on August 5. General Erskine reported that a
permanent solution of the Indochina crisis went beyond military action
alone, the core of the problem being a deep-seated hatred and distrust of
the French by the population that precluded their cooperation in the-
prosecution of the war. The mission also reported that the amount of aid
and the scope of the assistance thus far requested by the French were
inadequate to the needs of the situation. 38/

The first elements of the U.S. MAAG were assigned to Indo-
china on August 3, 1950; Brigadier General Francis G. Brink, USA, assumed
command as the first Chief of MAAG on October 10. The mission of the
MAAG was limited to provision of material assistance to the French forces
and indirect provision of military aid to the forces of the Associated
States; General Brink was directed not to assume any training or advisory
responsibilities toward the indigenous armies. But from the outset, the
French rigorously limited end-use inspections of MAAG to a small number
of carefully prescribed visits. 39/

f£. JCS Reevaluation

After the initial decision to provide assistance to France
and the Associated States had been taken, the formation of an economic mission
had been announced, the first shipment of arms and equipment had arrived in
Indochina, and the MAAG had been approved and was in the process of forma-
tion, concern mounted over the soundness of these moves. The Joint Chiefs
of Staff were again asked by the Secretary of Defense to formulate a posi-
tion on future U.S. actions with respect to Indochina, and the Southeast
Asia Aid Policy Committee (SEAAPC) published, on October 11, 1950, a draft
"Proposed Statement of U.S. Policy on Indochina.” The SEAAPC statement
proposed adding another dimension to U.S. assistance policy: "Regardless
of current U.S. commitments for provision of certain military assistance to
Indochina, the U.S. will not commit any of its armed forces to the defense
of Indochina against overt, foreign aggression, under present circumstances."
ho/ The paper also recommended that the U.S. support the “prompt accelera-
tion of the formavion of new national armies of the three Associated States,"
and a covering memorandum to the Secretaries of State and Defense recom-
mended that if negotiations were conducted with the French, U.S. representa-
tives should:

",e. Secure French acceptance of the following conditions
which shall attach to the extension of U.S. assistance in the

he ; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
