Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

destruction of specific targets by aerial bombardment or naval gunfire.
They could be supported by such non-destructive military actions as
aerial reconnaissance, harassment of civil aviation and maritime con-
merce, mock aim attacks, and timely concentrations of U.S. or allied
forces at sea or near land borders. Following a line of reasoning
prevalent in the Government during the early 60's, Rostow observed

that a target government might well reduce its insurgency supporting
role in the face of such pressures because of the communists' proverbial
"tactical flexibility." 72/

The thesis was subjected to a rather thorough analysis in OSD/ISA
and coordinated with the Department of State. The nature of this review
will be discussed on later pages and in a different context.

ACCOMPANYING PAUSE IN PRESSURES

The foregoing policy assessments were conducted in an atmosphere
relatively free of even those pressure measures that preceded the
Tonkin Gulf crisis. Since the force deployments of 6 August, little
military activity had been directed at the DRV. U-2 flights over North
Vietnam and reconnaissance of the Iaotian Panhandle were continued.
Military operations within Laos were limited to the consolidation of
gains achieved in Operation Triangle. A deliberate stand-down was
adopted for all other activities -- including DE SOTO Patrols and the
GVN's covert harassing operations. The purpose of this "holding phase,"
as it was called, was to "avoid actions that would in any way take the
onus off the Communist side for [the Tonkin/ escalation." 3/

However, during the "holding phase” some of the administrative
impediments to wider military action were cleared away. One measure
that was taken was to relax the operating restrictions and the rules
of engagement for U.S. forces in Southeast Asia. This was accomplished
in response to JCS urging that attacking forces not be permitted sanctuaries
from which to regroup and perhaps repeat their hostile acts. / Prior
rules had not permitted pursuit of hostile aircraft outside South Vietnam
or authorized intercept of intruders over Thailand. {5/ Under the revised
rules of 15 August 1964, U.S. forces were authorized to attack and destroy
any vessel or aircraft “which attacks, or gives positive indication of
. intent to attack" U.S. forces operating in or over international waters
and in Laos, to include hot pursuit into the territorial waters or air
space of North Vietnam and into the air space over other countries of
Southeast Asia. "Hostile aircraft over South Vietnam and Thailand" coulda
be engaged as vell and pursued into North Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. 16/

Another prerequisite to wider military action that was accomplished
was the combined GVN-U.S. planning for cross-border ground operations.
By 16 August, this had proceeded to such an extent that COMUSMACYV believed
it necessary to seek approval of the concept and appropriate to urse that
Phase I of the program get underway. Significant for understanding the
pressure for wider actions increasingly being brought to bear on the

wee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
