Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

deployment should have been a highly visible step unequivocal in its
meaning to Hanoi. Yet, there is no evidence that anyone in the U.S.
government intended the deployment to convey such a signal and there was
no discussion of what responses we expected from Hanoi. If this indeed
were an unspoken objective, it made little dent on NVN designs. If any-
thing, it may have aided those in Hanoi who wanted to send additional
regular NVA units into SVN.

A fourth U.S. objective was bolstering morale within the GVN and the
concomitant willingness to carry on the fight. It was quite reasonable
to assume that the Marines, like the air strikes on NVN that preceded
them, did have a beneficial effect on morale. It is equally obvious,
however, that any such effects would be transitory. Long-term improve-
ments in morale could only come with dramatic and lasting alteration of
the situation, and the two Marine battalions did not have that capability
by themselves.

It seems from this vantage point that only the objective of base
security really made sense. The deployment of the Marines to Da Nang might
have deterred an attack on the base by a regiment of main force Viet Cong.
The Marine Infantry were dug in on commanding terrain facing the North
and West along the most likely avenues of approach. The security of the
base was by no means assured by their presence, however, as by their own
‘admission they were in no position to prevent determined attack -- or,
especially, raids and mortar attacks -- the kind that had done so much
damage to Bien Hoa the year before. 61/ The U.S. forces only had re-
sponsibility for half of the base complex, and it was doubted that the
RVNAF could prevent the Viet Cong infiltrating sabotage squads through
the heavily populated areas on the GVN side. The Marines did not, as
Secretary Rusk said they would, put a tight security ring around the
base. The ring was not closed until considerably later, and even then,
the Viet Cong successfully penetrated the defenses and caused considera- -
ble damage in a raid on 1 July 1965 -- the first of a series of raids '
that have continued up to the present.

The landing of the Marines at Da Nang was a watershed event in the
history of the U.S. involvement in Vietnam. It represented a major deci-
sion made without much fanfare -- and without much planning. Whereas the
decision to begin bombing North Vietnam was the product of a year's dis-
cussion, debate, and a lot of paper, and whereas the consideration of
pacification policies reached talmudic proportions over the years, this
decision created less than a ripple. A mighty commandment of U.S. foreign
policy -- thou shall not engage in an Asian land war -- had been breached.
Besides CINCPAC and General Westmoreland who favored the deployment, Am-
bassador Taylor who concurred with deep reservation, and ASD McNaughton
who apparently tried to add a monkey wrench, this is a decision without
faces. The seeming ease with which the Marines were introduced and the -
mild reaction from Hanoi served to facilitate what was to come. It also
weakened the position of those who were, a few scant months later, to
oppose the landing of further U.S. ground combat forces.

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
