Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

were in something of a dilemma about Southeast Asia. We felt
there might be some value in a serious exchange of views
between our two Governments but that we did not know whether.
they themselves wished to discuss it.

He commented with considerable seriousness that the Soviets
will not negotiate about Viet-Nam. He said there were other
parties involved in that situation and that the United States
would have to find ways of establishing contact with them, and
he specifically mentioned the DRV. He said they will continue
to support North Viet-Nem and will do so "decisively." He then
made reference to a fellow socialist coumtry under attack.

I interrupted to point out that the problem was not that a&
socialist country was subject to attack but that a socialist
country was attacking someone else. I said that American
military forces are in South Vietnam solely because North Viet-
nem has been sending large numbers of men and arms into the
South.

He denied these facts in the usual rituel fashion put added
that in any event it was not up to the United Stetes to be the
judge between Vietnamese. T reminded him that he must know by
now that a North Korean attack against South Koreans would not
be accepted merely because both were Korean. He merely com-
mented that there were important differences between those two
situations.

He referred to Dobrynin's talk with me and seid that une
temporary suspension of bombing was “insulting.” tapes yt,
could not understand this in view of the fact that Hanol,
Peiping and Moscow have all talked about the impossibility of
discussions while bombing was going on.

At this point Chancellor Klaus joined the table to express
great happiness that Gromyko and I were sitting together.
Neither one of us dispelled his illusion.

I do not know whether Gromyko will pursue the matter
further when the four foreign ministers meet briefly with
Quaison+Sackey this afternoon or when we all assemble for
the opera tonight.

Thompson and I both have the impression that Gromyko's
attitude clearly means that the Salinger talk was of little
substance and that we should now merely consider what kind
of signal we wish to get back by way of Salinger as 4 part of
the closing out process,

; 295 * TOP SECRET - Sensitive
