Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive .

VIL. ROLLING THUNDER BECOMES A CONTINUING PROGRAM
A. Reeser Concern Over Cost-Ineffectiveness of Strikes

As has been indicated, ROLLING THUNDER was finally inaugurated,
after much teey, and postponement, on March 2. On that dey, 104 USAF
aircraft (B-52's, F-100's, F-105's, and refueling KC-135's) struck the
Xom Bang Ammo Depot, while 19 VWAF A-1H's hit the Quang Khe Naval Base. 82/
This was the first strike on the North in which USAF aircraft pleyed the
dominant role. Although the attack was officially proclaimed "very suc-
cessful," the loss of four USAF aircraft, three to antiaircraft fire, in-
tensified earlier OSD concern over the effectiveness of the strikes and
over the vulnerability of US aircreft.

Shortly after the first two February reprisal raids, the Secre-
tary of Defense had received some disturbing bomb damage assessment
reports that indicated that,

-..With a total of 267 sorties (including flak suppression,
etc.) directed against 491 buildings, we destroyed 47 buildings
and damaged 22. ;
The reports caused McNamara to fire off a rather blunt memoran-
dum to the CJCS, dated 17 February 1965, which stated in part:

Although the four missions left the operations at the
targets relatively unimpaired, I am quite satisfied with the
results. Our primary objective, of course, was to communi-
cate our political resolve. This I believe we did. Future
communications of resolve, however, will carry a hollow ring
unless we accomplish more military damage than we have to

“date. Can we not better meet our military objectives by
choosing different types of targets, directing different
weights of effort against them, or changing the composition
of the force? Surely we cannot continue for months accom-
plishing no more with 267 sorties than we did on these four
missions.

The Chairman of the JCS promptly asked his staff to look into
the matter and reported back a few days Jater on some initial points of
interest:

(1) We do not heave sufficient or timely information
about the results of the strikes;

(2) In light of prior detailed study of the targets
(94 Target Study), the weight of effort expended against
at least two of them is open to question;

(3) The weaponeering against the directed targets is
. open to question.

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
