Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

FROM THE PHILIPPINES
Eyes Only for the President from General Taylor.

This message is for the purpose of presenting my reasons for recommending
the introduction of a U.S. military force into South Vietnam (SVN). I
have reached the conclusion that this is an essential action if we are

to reverse the present downward trend of events in spite of a full
recognition of the following disadvantages:

a. The strategic reserve of U.S. forces is presently so weak that.
we can ill afford any detachment of forces to a peripheral area of the
Communist bloc where they will be pinned down for an uncertain dura-
tion.

be Although U.S. prestige is already engaged in SVN, it will be-
come more so by the sending of troops. :

ec. If the first contingent is not enough to accomplish the
necessary results, it will be difficult to resist the pressure to re-
inforce. If the ultimate result sought is the closing of the frontiers
and the clean-up of the insurgents within SVN, there is no limit to
our possible commitment (unless we attack the source in Hanoi).

d. The introduction of U.S. forces may increase tensions and
risk escalation into a major war in Asia.

@n the other side of the argument, there can be no action so convincing
of U.S. seriousness of purpose and hence so reassuring to the people
and Government of SVN and to our other friends and allies in SEA as

the introduction of U.S. forces into SVN. The views of indigenous

and U.S. officials consulted on our trip were unanimous on this point.
I have just seen Saigon 545 to State and suggest that it be read in
connection with this message. *

The size of the U.S. force introduced need not be great to provide

the military presence necessary to produce the desired effect on

national morale in SVN and on international opinion. A bare token,
however, will not suffice; it must have 4 significant value. The

kinds of tasks which it might undertake which would have a signifi-

cant value are suggested in BAGUZ#$5 (previous cable, 3.b.(7)}. They are:

(a) Provide a US military presence capable of raising national
morale and of showing to Southeast Asia the seriousness of the US
intent to resist a Communist take-over.

(b) Conduct logistical operations in support of military
and flood relief operations.

* Quoted below, page 25 98
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
