Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

not the case -- as has so often been said -- of which came
first, the hen or the egg...

* * * * x

"This is obviously not reflected in our present organization

under which, nonetheless, much has been accomplished. When

Mac Bundy told me in February, after the Vice President's visit,
* of the decision to relieve Porter of all of his duties as Deputy

(except that of being Charge d'Affaires in case of my absence)

so that he could take charge of the civilian aspects of paci-

fication, I did not at first welcome the idea. I mst, however,

recognize that under Porter a real asset has been built.

"To sum up, therefore, the first priority is more U.S.
troops to be allotted to pacification as set forth in paragraph
3; the second priority is better operation and tightening up
of the present organization; thirdly, are organizational changes.

"Considering that your messege was "EYES ONLY," I request
authority to discuss it and my comments and plans with the
heads of the different Mission agencies involved here. We
are all anxious to make progress in RD, and the effort will
involve all of us. It requires security and time. Whatever
the trial period may be, I suggest we maintain a constant
taking stock of progress and of problems. Lodge." 5l/

Back came Washington's answer on November 12, giving Lodge permission
to discuss the matter and show the cables to Porter, Westmoreland, and
"once plans mature, inform members Mission Council." With the civilians
in Washington already feeling that their trial period was underway, they
sought to get the Mission moving faster to reorganize. The cables became
@ series of hints and threats and detailed guidance. The difficulty in
commmication was quite high. Thus, the November 12 cable, drafted by
Ambassador Unger and cleared with McNamara, Helms, Gaud, Komer, Marks,
Katzenbach, and Rusk, and slugged "for Ambassador from Secretary, SecDef,
and Komer," laid out for Ledge and Porter a detailed description of how
the new structure shonld look -- although everyone knew that the plans
had already been drawn up and were sitting on Lodge and Porter's desks
in Saigon -- and began with this warning-hint:

"Following steps need to be taken promptly if we are, in

the time available, to give adequate test to organization

which is intended to keep RD civilian functions under civilian

management, an objective to which we know you attach consider-

able important." 55/

The cable went on to outline the organization, and discuss the question

of the use of U.S. troops:

re
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
