Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Se BGS Mgace So NERS

for covert military operations -- i.,e., 34A, Cross-Border, Yankee Team, Lucky
Dragon, ete. These operations, and the political problems of the central
government, appear to have been the principal immediate concerns of the En-
bassy during this period,

In October, Washington queried the Embassy as to whether greater progress
in pacification might result from further decentralization of the program,
even raising the question of whether aid might not bypass the GVN in Saigon
and go directly to the provinces. In reply, the Mission conceded that a good
deal of decentralization was already in effect and that in some provinces
local initiative was paying off. Progress was continuing despite the turmoil
in Saigon. Nevertheless, recent U.S, advisor reports showed that the number
of provinces where pacification was not going satisfactorily had doubled since
July -- from 7 to 14, This in part was due to concentration of most of the
pacification efforts on HOP TAC, and in part to the political turmoil in Saigon.
However, the Mission did not believe that further decentralization was eithér
feasible or advisable. The central problem in administering pacification, in
the considered view of the Mission, was to establish justified requirements at
the provincial level and then fill pipelines to meet these provincial needs,
This required overall coordination. Laiy

Two weeks after the 13 September coup, the High National Council, composed

of 17 elderly professional men, was inaugurated. Despite the continuing air

of crisis, the Council fulfilled its promise to deliver a new constitution by
the end of October and selected Phan Khac Suu (an older, non-aligned politi-
cian) as the new Chief of Staff. Suu immediately chose a civilian, Tran Van
Huong, as new Premier, Huong almost immediately came under fire from several
factions and it soon became apparent that Khanh was still the real power be-
hind the throne. Khanh got rid of Khiem, sending him to Washington, and Minh
went abroad on a "goodwill tour." 132/

As the year moved toward a close it came time again for the Ambassador to.
return to Washington for policy consultations, Progress in the program within
South Vietnam had been spotty at best, and in many areas retrogression could
not be denied, The efforts to develop efficient administration within the GVN
had made no progress at all -- the game of musical chairs at the top made this
impossible. It was generally conceded that pacification had fallen back, at
best marking time in some areas, As for the HOP TAC area immediately surround-
ing Saigon, opinions were divided. The official view reflected in the statis-
tical analysis was that slow but steady progress was being made, Most of the
informal and local Judgments, however, were less sanguine. Some increases in
RVNAF recruitment had been registered, but this did not mean that action against
the VC had improved, that capabilities had increased, that lost ground was being
retaken, or that.control of the rural population was being wrested from the Viet
Cong. ;

3. Whe Period of Increasing Pressures on NVN

In anticipation of the Ambassador's forthcoming visit to Washington,
General Westmoreland provided an assessment of the military situation,

. 98 *
= TOP SECRET - Sensitive
