Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Thus the war in South Viet-Nam is called a ‘war of national libera-
tion.’ And those who would overthrow various other non-Communist govern-
ments in Asia, Africa, and Latin America are called the ‘forces of national
liberation.'

"Nobody in his right mind would deny that Venezuela is not only a
truly independent nation but that it has a government chosen in a free
election. But the leaders of the Communist insurgency in Venezuela are .
described as leaders of a fight for ‘national liberation'--not only by
themselves and by Castro and the Chinese Communists but by the Soviet
Communists.

"A recent editorial in Pravda spoke of the ‘peoples of Latin America
».smarching firmly along the path of struggle for their national inde-
pendence’ and said, '...the upsurge of the national liberation movement
in Latin American countries has peck to a great extent a result of the
activities of Communist parties.' It added:

'The Soviet people have regarded and still regard it as their
sacred duty to give support to the peoples fighting for their independence.
True to their international duty the Soviet people have been and will
remain on the side of the Latin American patriots.'

"In Communist doctrine and practice, a non-Communist government may
be labeled and denounced as ‘colonialist,’ ‘reactionary,’ or a 'puppet,'
and any state so labeled by the Communists automatically becomes fair game--
while Communist intervention by force in non-Communist states is justified
as 'self-defense' or part of the ‘struggle against colonial domination.'
'Self-determination' seems to mean that any Communist nation can determine
by itself that any non-Communist state is a victim of colonialist domina-
tion and therefore a justifiable target for a ‘war of liberation.'

"As the risks of overt aggression, whether nuclear or with conven-
tional forces, have become increasingly evident, the Communists have put
increasing stress on the ‘war of national liberation.’ The Chinese Com-
munists have been more militant in language and behavior than the Soviet
Communists. But the Soviet Communist leadership also has consistently
proclaimed its commitment in principle to support wars of national libera-
tion. This commitment was reaffirmed as recently as Monday of this week
by Mr. Kosygin [Bleksai N. Kosygin, Chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of
Ministers/.

"International law does not restrict internal revolution within a
state or revolution against colonial authority. But international law
does restrict what third powers may lawfully do in support of insurrection.
It is these restrictions which are challenged by the doctrine, and violated
by the practice, of 'wars of liberation.’

"Tt is plain that acceptance of the doctrine of ‘wars of liberation'
would emount to scuttling the modern international law of peace which the
charter preseribes. And acceptance of the practice of ‘wars of liberation, '

D-36
