p=

rd ate
+g
:

ee ee en el iasarinsionaieeeihinel

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section a3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

} and is necessary to establish and support governments Gs Panel e as
particularly in Vietnam, under leaders who are capable of attracting
to their causes the non-communist nationalist followers who had
drifted to,the Ho Chi Minh communist movement in the absence of
any non-cormunist nationalist movement around which to plan their
ospiceueer

5. ‘In an effort to establish stability by political means,
where military measures had been unsuccessful, i.e., by attracting
non-communist nationalists, now followers of Ho Chi Minh, to the
support of anti-communist nationalist leaders, the French Govern-
ment entered into agreements with the governments of the Kingdoms
of Laos and Cambodia to elevate their status from protectorates to
that of independent stetes within the French Union. The State of
Vietnam was formed, with similar status, out of the former French
protectorates of Tonkin, Annam and the former French Colony of
Cochinchina, Each state received an increased degree of autonomy
and sovereignty. Further steps towards independence were indicated
by the French. The agreements were ratified by the French Govern-
ment on 2 February 1950.

6. The Governments of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia were offi-
cially recognized by the United States and the United Kingdom on
February 7, 1950. Other Western powers have, or are committed to
do likewise. The United States has consistently brought to the
. attention of non-communist Asian countries the danger of communist
) aggression which threatens them if communist expansion in Indochina
is unchecked. As this danger becomes more evident it is expected
to overcome the reluctance that they have had to recognize and
support the three new states, We are therefore continuing to press
those countries to recognize the new states. On January 18, 1950,
the Chinese Communist Government announced its recognition Of the
Ho Chi Minh movement as the legal Government of Vietnam, while on
January 30, 1950, the Soviet Government, while maintaining diplo-
matic relations with France, similarly announced its recognition,

ts The newly formed States of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia do
not as yet have sufficient political stability nor military power to
prevent the infiltration into their areas of Ho Chi Minh's forces.
The French Armed Forces, while apparently effectively utilized at
the present time, can do little more than to maintain the status
quo. Their strength of some 140,000 does, however, represent an
army in being and ~ the only military bulwe rk in that area against
the further expansion of communist aggression from either internal
or external forces.

8. The presence of Chinese Communist troops along the border
of Indochina makes it possible for arms, material and troops to mes
freely from Communist Chine to the northern Tonkin area now con-
trolled by Ho Chi Minh. There is already evidence of movement <+
arms,

Msc 64 — 284 op =

un
"J
