Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

¢. Elysee Agreement, 1949

On March 8, 1949, after months of negotiations, French
President Auriol, in an exchange of letters with Bao Dai, reconfirmed
independence for Vietnam as an Associated State of the French Union
and detailed procedures for unifying Vietnam and placing it under
Vietnamese administration. Nonetheless, in the Elysee Agreement, France
yielded control of neither Vietnam's army nor its foreign relations, and
again postponed arrangements for virtually all other aspects of autonomy.
However, Bao Dai, apparently convinced that France was now sufficiently
desperate in Indochina that it would have to honor the Agreements,
declared that:

"...An era of reconstruction and renovation will
open in Vietnam. The country will be given democratic
institutions that will be called on primarily to
approve the present agreement....Profound economic and
social reforms will be instituted to raise the general
standard of living and to promote social justice, which
is the condition and guarantee of order.../I look for
the union of all Vietnamese regardless of their politi-
cal and religious tendencies, and the generous support
of France on which I can count...”

His public stance notwithstanding, Bao Dai delayed his return to Vietnam
until a Cochinchinese Assembly had been elected (albeit in a farce of an
election), and did not proceed to Saigon until the French Assembly had
approved Cochinchina's joining the rest of Vietnam. In late June, 1949,
Vietnam was legally united under Bao Dai, but the related alteration of
administrative functions was slow, and usually only pro forma; no genuine
power or authority was turned over to the Vietnamese. The State of
Vietnam became a camouflage for continued French rule in Indochina. As
Bao Dai himself characterized the situation in 1950, "What they call a
Bao Dai solution turned out to be just a French solution....The situation

in Indochina is getting worse every day..." 6/
d. Bao Dai's Governments .

The unsavory elements of the coalition supporting Bao Dai

- dominated his regime. Ngo Dinh Diem and a few other upright nationalists
refused high government posts, and withdrew their support from Bao Dai
when their expectations of autonomy were disappointed.  Diem's public
statement criticized the probity of those who did accept office:

"The national aspirations of the Vietnamese people
will be satisfied only on the day when our nation obtains
the same political regime which India and Pakistan enjoy...
I believe it is only just to reserve the best posts in the
new Vietnam for those who have deserved best of the country;
I speak of those who resist..." 7/

A-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
