Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It should be noted that the program has not been a ‘strategic’ bombing
program; it has been limited to selected targets of fairly direct mili-
tary relevance. Populations and targets such as dikes and basic industries
have not been struck. Furthermore, the immediate vicinities of Hanoi and
Haiphong have been avoided, partly because the targets there are ;
primarily of the ‘strategic’ type and partly because strikes there would
involve even more serious risks of confrontations with the Soviet Union
and China.

Ss Other effects of the program.

a. Deterrence of VC terrorism. There is no evidence that
strikes against North Vietnam have affected one way or another the
level or kind of VC incidents of terror in South Vietnam.

be Morale in South Vietnam. Morale in South Vietnam was
raised by the initiation of the bombing program (as, later, by the de-
ployment of additional troops). Wow -- with the bombing programs having
become commonplace and with the failure of the situation to improve --.
morale in South Vietnam is not discernibly better than it was before
the bombing program began. In a sense, South Vietnam is now Taddicted'
to the program; a permanent abandonment of the program would have a
distinct depressing effect on morale in South Vietnam.

c. Reduction of criticism of the Administration. Some
critics, who advocated bombing, were silenced; others are now as vocal
or more vocal because the program has been too limited for their taste.
The program has generated a new school of criticism among liberals and
*peace' groups, whose activities have been reflected especially in
teach-ins and newspaper criticisms.

d. Damage to peaceful image of the US. The price paid for
improving our image as a guarantor has been damage to our image as a
country which eschews armed attacks on other nations. The hue and cry
correlates with the kind of weapons (e.g., bombs vS- napalm), the kind
of targets (e.g., bridges vs. people), the location of targets (e.g,
south vs. north), and not least the extent to which the critic feels
threatened by Asian communism (e.g., Thailand vs. the UK). Further-
more, for a given level of bombing, the hue and ery is less now than it
was earlier, perhaps to some extent helped by Communist intransigence
toward discussions. The objection to our ‘warlike’ image and the
approval of our fulfilling our commitments competes in the minds of
many nations (and individuals) in the world, producing a schizophrenia. .
Within such ellied countries as UK and Japen, popular antagonism to
the bombings per se, fear of escalation and belief that the bombings
are the main obstacle to negotiation, have created political problems
for the governments in their support of US policy.

138 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
