Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C-0-P=-¥
Viet-Nam Dan Chu Cong Hoa ;
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM

Chinh Phu Lam Thoi
BO NGOAI GIAO NOE

to the Governments of CHINA, UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, UNION OF SOCIALIST SOVIETIC REPUBLICS
and GREAT~BRITAIN.

I.- In 1940, the French in Indochina betrayed the Allies. They
deliberately opened the doors of Indochina to the Japanese troops, signed
with the latter a military, political and economical pact. The Nippo-
French cooperation policy, promoted and carried out with conviction and
industry by JEAN DECOUX, former Governor-General of Indochina, was directed
against the democratic movements inside Indochina and the Allied Nations
outside. In fact the French put at the disposal of the Japanese forces
the strategic bases, the economic and financial resources of Indochina.

The technical services, especially the Indochinese Intelligence Service
supplied the Japanese with precious informations. The French airfields

of GIALA, TAYSONNHAT and others were handed over to the Japanese Air
Forces, new metalled tracts were created with the collaboration of French
technicians at TRAICUT, SONIA, PHUTHO, BACGIANG, PHANHHOA, PHUCTHO, PHUCYEN,
VIWHYEN. French colonialis launched violent propaganda campaigns against
the Allies, and personal instructions were given by Governor-General Decoux
to the I.P.P. (Information, Press, Propaganda Service) to that effect. The
French administration requisitioned considerable stocks of rice, thus
starving a population of 20 million inhabitants among whom 2,000,000 died
of famine and hardships, in the course of five months (from January to May
1945), all this to feed the Japanese army in their Western and Southern
operations.

In the meanwhile, the Vietnamese nationalist parties made repeated
appeals to the French for a joint action against the Japanese. These
appeals were ignored by the French Government.

r

On March 9, 1915, the French surrendered to the Japanese, after a sham .
fight which did not last a couple of days. Stocks of arms, ammunitions,
fortifications, airfields, millions of liters of oil were handed over to
the Japanese. This extraordinary carelessness denoted, if not complicity,,
at least an obvious goodwill on the part of the French. Thus, twice in
the course of five years, the French have willingly helped the fascists
in their fight against the democracies. Twice the French have willingly
handed over to the Japanese capital strategic, economical and technical
advantages, for the prosecution of the Pacific Battle.

II.- In August 1945, the Japanese surrendered to the Allies. The
popular forces of Vietnam which, since 1940, had made incessant attacks
on the Japanese forces, and which had, in 194, succeeded in creating a
"Pree Zone" in Northern Indochina, went down to conquer the capital-city
and the governing rule. The population, fired with democratic aspirations

C-0-P-Y

c-98
