Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

unconditional discussions. The following day, Pham Van Dong published his
Four Points in what seemed a defiant, and unyielding response, This sharp
DRV rebuff of the President's initiative may well have accelerated the re-
orientation. The re-orientation of policy itself, however, was expressed
not in an explicit restatement of formal policy, but in a series of action
decisions over the following fortnight that caught the Saigon Mission very
much by surprise,

The Ambassador's nodis to the President on 13 April had a comparatively
optimistic tone. It began, "We have just completed another quite favorable
week in terms of losses inflicted upon the Viet Cong...." The critical
conditions in Bien Dinh Province had been considerably relieved and the
province, it was believed, was about back to normal, Although a large part
of the province remained under Viet Cong control, many areas had been re-
stored to government control and the fear of the loss of major towns seemed
past. There had been aggressive action by a new division commander, and
there seemed to be improved morale attributable to the air actions against
North Vietnam, There was a possibility that the Viet Cong were regrouping
and they would probably soon engage in some new kind or phase of offensive
action, . But, then as now, there were what some interpreted as indications
thet the Viet Cong morale might be dropping. Furthermore, estimates -- not
audited figures -~- indicated that the government military and paramilitary
forces had been increased by some 10,000 during the month of March as
against the target of 8,000 per month, Prime Minister Quat was continuing
his program of visiting the provinces, and in addition to making himself
and the Saigon government known to the hinterlands, he had expressed parti-
cular interest in such projects as rural electrification, agricultural
development, water supply and school construction. Quat's principal worry
continued to be the unruly generals and there was continued evidence of
disunity within the senior officers corps. 146/

Within two days, however, messages went out from Washington indicating
that decisions had been made at the highest level to go beyond the measures
specified in NSAM-328, On 15 April, McGeorge Bundy sent a personal nodis
to Ambassador Taylor saying that the President had just approved important
future military deployments and that some personal explanation might be
helpful.

The President has repeatedly emphasized his personal desire
for a strong experiment in the encadrement of U.S. troops with
the Vietnamese, He is also very eager to see prompt experiments
in use of energetic teams of U.S. officials in support of pro-
visional governments under unified U.S, leadership. These
desires are’the source of corresponding paragraphs in our message,

On further troop deployments, the President's belief is that

current situation requires use of all practical means of streng-
thening position in South Vietnam and that additional U.S. troops

: 115 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
