Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

after we had made sufficient progress in the
Delta so that all concerned began to realize that
the Viet Cong were losing the support of the
population, and that their ability to continue
the war depended solely on North Vietnamese
support, I think we should indicate as much
privately to the North Vietnamese and follow this
by selected attacks on their infiltration bases
and training camps.

In my judgment, significant action against
North Vietnam that is taken before we have demon-
strated success in our counterinsurgency program
will be interpreted by the Commmists as an act of
desperation, and will, therefore, not be effective
in persuading the North Vietnamese to cease and
desist. What is worse, I think that premature
action will so alarm our friends and allies and
& significant segment of domestic opinion that the
pressures for neutralization will become formidable.

In sum, I believe that we can win in Vietnam
with a number of provisos.

The first proviso is that we do not over-
militarize the war--that we concentrate not on
killing Viet Cong...but on an effective program
for extending the areas of security gradually,
systematically, and thoroughly...

My second proviso is that there be political
stability in Saigon... 50/

Some of the Hilsman recommendations were to be adopted, none re-
jected out-of-hand. The so-called oil blot principle had many adherents,
and was in fact already coming into vogue. Over the ensuing months, the
phrase was much honored, though the execution may have faltered. No one
disputed the principle that the hamlets needed security above all else,
nor that everything depended on a stable government in Saigon. Never-
theless, emphasis shifted toward greater emphasis on military operations,
perhaps for the pressing reason that the VC were out now in increasing
numbers, with more and better weapons, seeming to invite, if not to
require, conventional military operations if the VC threatening the
hamlets were to be destroyed or reduced to powerlessness. And, above all,
the more elusive the VC were, the stronger they grew, and the more un-
stable and unpopular the GVN became, the more tempting the idea of
attacking the north seemed to be.

Much more influential than these Hilsman views were those of the
JCS, especially as set forth in the memorandum of 18 February 1964 to
the SecDef from the Cjcs:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
37
