Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

"A great effort is being made by Communist propagenda to portray
it as something evil if Asia joins with the nations of the Americas and
Europe to get assistance which will help the peoples of Asia to secure
their liberty. These Communist nations have, in this connection,
adopted the slogan ‘Asia for the Asians."

"The Japanese war lords adopted a similar slogan when they sought
to subject Asia to their despotic rule. The similar theme of 'Europe
for the Europeans’ was adopted by Mr. Molotov at the Berlin Conference
when he proposed that the Europeans should seek security by arrangements
which would send the United States back home.

"Great despotic powers have always known that they could impose
their will and gain their conquests if the free nations stand apart and
none helps the other.

"It should be observed that the Soviet Communist aggression in
Europe took place only against countries which had no collective security
arrangements. Since the organization of the North Atlantic Treaty,
there has been no successful aggression in Europe.

"Of course, it is of the utmost importance that the United States
participation in creating collective security in Asia should be on a
basis which recognizes fully the aspirations and cultures of the Asian
peoples. We have a material and industrial strength which they lack and
which is an essential ingredient of security. Also they have cultural
and spiritual values of their own which make them our equals by every
moral standard.

"The United States, as the first colony of modern history to win
independence for itself, instinctively shares the aspirations for
liberty of all dependent and colonial peoples. We want to help, not
hinder the spread of liberty.

"We do not seek to perpetuate Western colonialism and we find even
more intolerable the new imperialist colonialism of communism.

"Phat is the spirit that animates us. If we remain true to that
spirit, we can face the future with confidence that we shall be in -
harmony with those moral forces which ultimately prevail.”

ll. President Eisenhower's News Conference, May 5, 1954, Public
Papers of the Presidents, 1954, P. E51: :
ee &

""nited States foreign policy has consistently supported the
principles on which was founded the United Nations. The basic expression
of this policy was the Vandenberg resolution in 1948. The United States
believes in assuring the peace and integrity of nations through collective

B16
