Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- Reaffirm Rural Construction as the foremost us/GvN
combined effort to solidify and extend GVN influence.

-- Authorize more direct U.S. involvement in GVN affairs
at those administrative levels adequate to ensure the
accomplishment of critical programs.

-- Delegate to the U.S. Ambassador unequivocal authority
as the sole manager of all U.S, activities, resources,
and personnel in-country.

-- Direct the Ambassador to develop 4 single integrated
plan for achieving U.S. objectives in SVN. 182

The PROVN Study proposed that leverage be employed at eae
within GVYN to achieve U.S. objectives. Noting that past uses had been
haphazard, it recommended the employment of a "continuum from subtle
interpersonal persuasion to withdrawal of U.S. support" following Uae
GVN agreement on specific programs, The South Vietnamese would, in
short, be aware that leverage would be employed if they failed to live
up to agreed obligations. 183/

After an initial period during which no discussion of the PROVN
Study was permitted outside the Army staff, the study finally received
wide distribution. Secretary McNamara was briefed on it, as were the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. MACV's comments were 61so solicited. The care-
fully worded reply from Saigon stated succinctly the case against the
use of leverage.

MACV is in complete agreement with PROV position that
immediate and substantially inercased United States direct
involvement in GVN activities in form of constructive in-
fluence and manipulation is essential to achievement of U.S.
objectives in Vietnam. PROVN emphasizes that "leverage

_ must originate in terms of reference established by govern-
ment agreement," and "leverage, in all its implications ,
must be ‘understood by the Vietnamese if it is to become an
effective tool." The direct involvement end leverege en~ -
visioned by PROVN could range from skillful diplomatic press-
ure to U.S. unilateral execution of critical programs.

MACV considers that there is a great danger that the extent
of involvement envisioned could become too great. A govern~
ment sensitive to its image es champion of national sov-
ereignty profoundly affected by the pressure of militant
minorities, and unsure of its tenure end legitimacy wili

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
