Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

Regional Director, Far East, ISA, from Brigadier General Edward
G. Lansdale, OSO/OSD, 13 September 1960, Subject: Possible
Course of Action in Vietnam, p. 1) (Underlining added)

To the end of meeting the threat from the Viet Cong,
Lansdale suggested (among other items):

" , . . The emphasis of the MAAG function should be
shifted from purely training and organizational advice in
preparation for defense against external aggression to include

on-the-spot advice and assistance in the conduct of tactical
operations against the Viet Cong." (Underlining added )

", . » Concomitantly, the MAAG should be staffed to a
greater extent with officers skilled in the conduct of counter-
guerrilla operations and who are capable of operating in the field.

This might include Marines for amphibious instruction on Mekong
River operations..."

". . . During the emergency, the Civil Guard should be
temporarily put under the Ministry of Defense in order to
integrate the activities of the ARVN and the Civil Guard.

The Ambassador's concern that the Civil Guard will lose all
identity as a civil police force, if this action is taken, is
invalid, providing a strong US position to the contrary is
announced and maintained." (Ibid., pp. 1-2)

(Subsequent development of the Regional Forces, which grew
out of the Civil Guard after transfer to the Ministry of Defense in
December 1960, showed this particular concern of the Ambassador to have
been a valid one -- whatever the countervailing advantages of the move
-- in that its role and capabilities as a police force atrophied
almost entirely; no "strong U.S. position to the contrary" was, however,
taken by MAAG, AID, or CAS.)

" , « « Emphasis on civic action type activities by the ARVN
should be encouraged and advisory and material assistance in
this field furnished through MAP and ICA channels."

" . . . Most importantly for the purpose of strengthening the
morale of the Vietnamese, President Diem should be informed as
soon as possible through appropriate channels of the gravity with
which the US government views the internal security situation,
of our intent to provide material assistance, and of our unswerving
support to him in this time of crisis." (Underlining added
Cibidss te 2)

Meanwhile, Ambassador Durbrow in Saigon proceeded to

elaborate upon the various political threats described in the August 30
SNIE. A week after the August 1960 SNIE was published, Ambassador Durbrow

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
