Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Tv.0.6.

U.S. GROUND STRATRGY AND FORCE DEPLOYMENTS

ma

I. PHASE IT

A. Prelude to Phase IT

The story of the Phase II build-up begins near the end of the chain
of events which led to the decision, announced on 28 July 1965, on a
Phase I build-up to 4 Free World battalions. Sparked by the news that
the Viet Cong were building up their strength, that ARVN was doing badly
on the battlefield, and that the President desired "that we find more
dramatic and effective actions in Sough Vietnam," 1/ Secretary of
Defense McNamara prepared to decide what forces would be necessary to
achieve the goals of the United States in Vietnam. The history of the
decision on the size and composition of the forces to be deployed during
the time remaining in 1965, termed Phase I forces, is the subject of
another study in this series. 2/ However, there were some events and
decisions taken in this period which were to influence the decisions on
Phase II forces. While Secretary McNamara was preparing for his 16-20
July trip to Saigon to discuss the build-up of American forces in
Vietnam, he asked General Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
for an assessment of "the assurance the U.S. can have of winning in South
Vietnam if we do everything we can." The results of the study, which
General Wheeler directed to be prepared by an ad hoc study group with
representation from the Office of the Chairman, the Chairman's Special
Studies Group, DIA, J-3, and the Joint War Games Agency, were given to
Secretary McNamara on 14 July. 3/ The study group's assessment was a
conditional affirmative. 4/ “Within the bounds of reasonable assump-
tions...there appears to be no reason we cannot win if such is our will
x7 and if that will is manifested in strategy and tactical operations."

At the same time, Secretary McNamara asked Assistant Secretary
McNaughton to work with the study group to suggest some of the questions
that occurred to him. McNaughton's memorandum to General Goodpaster is
included in full.

MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL GOODPASTER
Assistant to the Chairman, JCS

SUBJECT: Forces Required to Win in South Vietnam

Secretary McNamara this morning suggested that General Wheeler
form a small group to address the question, "If we do everything
we can, can we have assurance of winning in South Vietnam?"
seneral. Wheeler suggested that he would have you head up the
group and thet the group would be fairly small. Secretary

ai TOP SECRET - Sensitive
