Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

replacement perhaps desirable, (5) French Communists embar-
rassed in pose as guardian French international interests

by barrage telegraphic appeals from Vietnam. /Ambassador/
will express gratification this statement French policy with
observation implementation such policy should go far obviate
any danger that (1) Vietnamese irreconcilables and extremists
might be in position make capital of situation (2) Vietnamese
might be turned irrevocably against West and toward ideologies
and affiliations hostile democracies which could result per-
petual foment Indochina with consequences all Southeast Asia.

"Avoid impression US Govt making formal intervention this
juncture. Publicity any kind would be unfortunate.

"Paris be guided foregoing.

"Acheson, Acting.”

For a while, the French seemed genuinely interested in pursuing
a policy based on the March 6 Accord and the modus vivendi, and in
avoiding a test of arms with the DRV. If there were contrary utterances
from some, such as Admiral d'Argenlieu, the High Commissioner of Indo-

China, -- who recorded his "amazement that France has such a fine
expeditionary corps in Indochina and yet its leaders prefer to nego-
tiate rather than to fight...." -- there were many such as General

Leclerc, who had led French forces into Hanoi on 18 March 1946, and
promptly called on Ho Chi Minh, announcing every intention of honoring
the March 6 Accord. "At the present time," he said, "there is no ques-
tion of imposing ourselves by force on masses who desire evolution and
imnovat ion." 39/ The French Socialist Party -- the dominant political
party in France -- consistently advocated conciliation during 1946. In
December, 1946, even after the armed incidents in November between
French and DRV armed forces in North Vietnam, Leon Blum -- who had
become Premier of France, at the head of an all-Socialist Cabinet --
wrote that France had no alternative save to grant the Vietnamese inde-
pendence:

"There is one way and only one of preserving in Indochina ~
the prestige of our civilization, our political and spiritual
influence, and also those of our material interests which are
legitimate: it is sincere agreement [with Viet Nam/ on the
basis of independence...." 40

The Communists, the other major Leftist party in France, were also vocally
conciliatory; but, expectant of controlling the government, if not alone
at least as part of a coalition, they tended to be more careful than the
Socialists of their ability to sway nationalist sentiment. In July of
1946, L'Humanité, the Communist newspaper, had emphasized that the Party

A-31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
