Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

197
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

intelligence community had indicated that POL could become a factor
in constricting the truck traffic to the South. The statement was,
however, qualified,

The POL requirement for trucks involved in the infiltra-
tion movement has not been large enough to present significant
supply problems. But local shortages have occurred from time
to time and may become significant as a result of attacks on
the POL distribution system. 22/

By the end of the month, however, the CIA at least was more pessimistic:

Hanoi appears to believe that its transportation system
will be able to withstand increased air attacks and still
maintain an adequate flow of men and supplies to the South.

---Recent strikes against North Vietnam's POL storage
facilities have destroyed over 50 percent of the nation's
petroleum storage capacity. However, it is estimated that
substantial stocks still survive and that the DRV can con-
tinue to import sufficient fuel to keep at least essential
military and economic traffic moving. 23/

DIA continued to focus its assessments on the narrower effectiveness of

the strikes in destruction of some percentage of North Vietnamese POL
storage capacity without directly relating this to needs and import
potential. 2h/ By September, the two intelligence agencies were in
general agreement as to the failure of the POL strikes. In an evaluation
of the entire bombing effort they stated, "There is no evidence yet of

any shortage of POL in North Vietnam and stocks on hand, with recent imports,
have been adequate to sustain necessary operations." a5/ The report

went even further and stated that there was no evidence of insurmountable
transport difficulties from the bombing, no significant economic dislocation
and no weakening of popular morale.

Powerful reinforcement about the ineffectiveness of the
strikes came at the end of August when a special summer study group of
top American scientists submitted a series of reports through the JASON
Division of the Institute for Defense Analyses (treated comprehensively
below). One of their papers dealt in considerable detail with the entire

_ bombing program, generally concluding that bombing had failed in all its
specified goals. With respect to the recent petroleum attacks to disrupt
North Vietnamese transportation, the scientists offered the following
summary conclusions:

In view of the nature of the North Vietnamese POL systen,
the relatively small quantities of POL it requires, and the
options available for overcoming the effects of U.S. air
strikes thus far, it seems doubtful that any critical denial

143 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
