Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

se

"The commitment of the United States to its 40 or more allies is
a very important element in the building of a durable peace. And if
those who would be our adversaries should ever suppose that our com-
mitments are not worth anything, then we shall see dangers we have not
yet dreamed of." :

mae Mey ALE

73. Address by William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Fast

Asian end Pacific Affairs, before the 20th Annual Congress of the
National Student Association at College Park, Maryland, August 15,
.1967; “The Path to Viet-Nam: A Lesson in Involvement,” Department
of State Publication 8295, East Asian and Pacific Series 166,
aoe ir Gms mn

September 1967.

Eyuh ee Any

"The fifth set of American decisions came in this setting and indeed
overlapped the period of the Geneva Conference. The first aspect of these
decisions was our leading role in the formation of the SEATO treaty, signed
at Manila in September of 1954 and ratified by our Senate in February 1955
by a vote of 82 to 1. In the SEATO treaty South Viet-Nam and its terri-
tory were specifically included as a "protocol state’; and the signatories
specifically accepted the obligation, if asked by the Government of South
Viet-Nam, to take action in response to armed attack against South Viet-
Nam and to consult on appropriate measures if South Viet-Nem were subjected
to subversive actions. The Geneva accords had, of course, already ex-
pressly forbidden aggressive acts from either half of Viet-Nam against the
other half, but there had been no obligation for action by the Geneva
participating nations. SEATO created a new and serious obligation extending
to South Viet-lNam and aimed more widely at the security of the Southeast
Asian signatories and the successor states of Indochina.

"The second aspect of our decisions at this period was an evolving
one. In late 1954 President Eisenhower committed us to furnish economic
support for the new regime, in which Diem was already showing himself
tougher and more able than anyone had supposed possible. And in early
1955, without any formal statement, we began to take over the job of mili-
tary assistance to South Viet-Nam, acting within the numerical and equip-
ment limitations stated in the Geneva accords for foreign military aid.

"In short, in the 1954-55 period we movec. into a major supporting
role and undertook a major treaty commitment involving South Viet-Nam.

"These decisions, I repeat, are not mine to defend. In the mood of
the period, still deeply affected by a not unjustified view of monolithic
communism, they were accepted with very wide support in the United States,
as the vote and the debate in the Senate abundantly proved. And the

D-112
