Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

}i0

"The President: No, I believe it. I believe it. I think that the
struggle is close enough. Chine is so large, looms so high just beyond
the frontiers, that if South Viet-Nem went, it would not only give them
an improved geographic position for a guerrilla assault on Malaya but
would also give the impression that the wave of the future in Southeast
Asia was China and the Communists. So I believe it."

See cae
39. President Kennedy's News Conference, September 12, 1963, Public Papers’
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1963, p. 673:
* * *

"Q. Mr. President, in view of the prevailing confusion, is it possible
to state today just what this Government's policy is toward the current
government of South Viet-Nam?

"THE PRESIDENT. I think I have stated what my view is and we are for
those things and those policies which help win the war there. That is why
some 25,000 Americans have traveled 10,000 miles to participate in that
struggle. What helps to win the war, we support; what interferes with the
war effort, we oppose. I have already made it clear that any action by
either government which may handicap the winning of the war is inconsistent
with our policy or our objectives. This is the test which I think every
agency and official of the United States Government must apply to all of
our actions; and we shall be applying that test in various ways in the com-
ing months, although I do not think, it desirable to state all of our views
at this time. I think they will be made more clear as time goes on.

"But we have a very simple policy in that area, I think. In some ways -
I think the Vietnamese people and ourselves agree; we want the war to be
won, the Communists to be contained, and the Americans to go home. That is
our policy. I am sure it is the policy of the people of Viet-Nam. But we
are not there to see a war lost, and we will follow the policy which I have
indicated today of advancing those causes and issues which help win the
war.”

* % *

46. President Kennedy's Remarks at the Yellowstone County Fairgrounds
Billings, Montana, September 25 1963 Public Papers of the Presi-
dents, Kennedy, 1963, pb. Tek:

raph map

" .. Countries which we had never heard of before, Viet-Nam, Laos, the
Congo, and the others, countries which were distant names’ in our geogra-
phies, have now become matters of the greatest concern, where the interests
of the United States are vitally involved, and where we have, for example,
in Viet-Nam, over 25,000 of your sons and brothers bearing arms.

c-h2
