Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ll

CONTRADICTIONS EXAMINED AND RECONCILED

During this period, I had a series of meetings with my, chief civil-
jan and military advisers in which the apparent ambiguities and con-
tradictions in the reports were pare) and reconciled to our satis-
faction. We identified and refined various options for a response to
the attack, to be presented to the President. Among these options
was the air strike against the attacking boats and their associated
bases, which option was eventually selected. As the options were iden-
tified, preliminary messages were sent to appropriate operational com-
manders alerting them to the several possibilities so that initial plan-
ning steps could be undertaken. ; :

In the early afternoon, the National Security Council met, at
which time we briefed the participants, including the President, on
the available details of the atlack. Shortly thereafter, having received
the advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, we recommended to the Pres-
ident, and he approved, a response consisting of an sir strike on the
PT and Swatow boat bases and their associated facilities. During al
of this time, the message reports of the engagement from the ships,
plus other information of a very highly classified nature received dur-
ing the attack, were being reviewed to eliminate any doubt that an
attack on the destroyers in fact occured.

For example, I saw a message fro the onscene task group com-
mander which expressed doubts as to the validity of many of the
sonar reports. fk diccussent this message by telephone with the com-
mander in chief, Pacific, and informed him that, although we would
continue with the preparations, the reprisal strike would not be
executed until we were absolutely positive of the attack. He of course
agreed and in a later telephone call informed me that he was satisfied,
from all the reports he had on hand, that an attack on our ships had
taken place, '

Finally, at about 6:30 p.m., Washington time, the message to

-execute the strike was transmitted by the commander in chief, Pacific.

Those are the essential details. To recapitulate, on August 2, one
of our destroyers was attacked by North Vietnamese naval forces
without provocation while on patrol on the high seas. Since the de-
stroyer had suffered no damage and had repulsed and damaged her
attackers, and since the possibility seemed to exist that the incident
was an isolated act, no further military response was made. North
Vietnam was warned the next day, however, of the “grave conse-
quences which would inevitably follow” another such attack. Further-
more, the President announced that the patrol would continue and
would consist of two destroyers. The next night, the two destroyers
were also attacked without provocation on the high seas by North
Vietnamese naval forces,

When these facts were established to the complete satisfaction of
all responsible authorities, we responded with an air strike on the
facilities whi-h supported the attacking vessels.

90-187— 6S. 2

