Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

number of sorties would slowly increase with each succeeding week. How-
ever, once the first week's level of two missions of four aircraft each

was determined by Secretary McNamara, it became the guideline for the
remainder of December and January. Covert GVN operations along the North
Vietnamese coast were continued at about the level of the previous months
and JCS proposals for direct U.S. air and naval support were rejected.
Furthermore, the public disclosure of information on DRV infiltration into
the South was deferred at the request of Secretary McNamara. On December 2h,
the Viet Cong bombed a U.S. officers billet in Saigon killing two Americans.
MACV, CINCPAC, the JCS, and Ambassador Taylor all called immediately for a
reprisal strike against the North of the kind authorized under phase I.

For reasons still not clear, the Administration decided against such a
reprisal. Thus, in purely military terms, the phase I period turned out

to be little more than a continuation of measures already underway. (The
BARREL ROLL activity apparently was not differentiated by the DRV from

RLAF strikes until well into January.)

One of the explanations for this failure to fully implement the
Decenber 1 decisions was the political crisis that erupted in South Vietnam.
Ambassador Taylor had returned to South Vietnam on December 7 and immedi-
ately set about getting the GVN to undertake the reforms we desired, making
clear to both the civilian and military leaders that the implementation of
phase II was contingent on their efforts to revive the flagging war effort
and morale in the South. For his efforts, he was rewarded with a military
purge of the civilian government in late December and rumored threats that
he would be declared personna non grate. The political crisis boiled on
into January with no apparent solution in sight in spite of our heavy
pressure on the military to return to a civilian regime. And, while Taylor
struggled with the South Vietnamese generals, the war effort continued to
decline.

At the same time that Taylor had been dispatched to Saigon a vigorous
U.S. diplomatic effort had been undertaken with our Asian and NATO allies
to inform them of the forthcoming U.S, intensification of the war, with
the expected eventual strikes against the North. The fact that our allies
now came to expect this action may have been @ contributing reason in the
February decision to proceed with phase II in spite of the failure of the
South Vietnamese to have complied with our requirements. In any case, it
added to the already considerable momentum behind the policy of striking the
North. By the end of January 1965, William Bundy, McNaughton, Taylor and
others had come to believe that we had to proceed with phase II irrespective
of what the South Vietnamese did.

Clear indication that the Administration was considering some kind of
escalation came on January 25. Ambassador Taylor was asked to comment on
a proposal to withdraw U.S. dependents from Saigon so as to "clear the
decks." Previously, this action, which was now approved by the JCS, was
always. associated with pressures against the North. While there is no
indication of any decision at this point to move into phase II, it is clear
that the preparations were SEBS ES underway.

vii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
