Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

acquired a newspaper called Thoi Iuan. Thoi Luan became the best-selling
newspaper in South Vietnam (all papers were published in Saigon, except
Can's government paper in Hue), with a circulation of about 80,000 copies.
After a series of statements critical of the GVN, Thoi Luan was sacked

by a mob in September, 1957. Unheeding of that warning, the paper continued
an opposition editorial policy until March, 1958, when the GVN closed the
paper, and gave the editor a stiff fine and a suspended prison sentence

for an article including the following passage: gh/

"What about your democratic election?

"During the city-council and village council elections
under the_'medieval and colonialist' Nguyen Van Tam Adminis-
tration [onder Bao-Dai, in 1953/, constituents were threatened
and compelled to vote; but they were still better than your
elections, because nobody brought soldiers into Saigon by the
truckload "to help with the voting.'

"What about your presidential regime?

"You are proud for having created for Viet-Nam a regime that
you think is similar to that of the United States. If those regimes
are similar, then they are as related as a skyscraper is to a tin-
roofed shack, in that they both are houses to live in.

"In the U.S.A., Congress is a true parliament and Congressmen
are legislators, i.e., free.and disinterested men who are not
afraid of the government, and who know their duties and dare to
carry them out. Here the deputies are political functionaries
who make laws like an announcer in a radio station, by reading out
loud texts that have been prepared /for them/ beforehand...." 95/

A month later, the Democratic Bloc collapsed. Dr. Dan attempted to obtain
GVN recognition for another party, the Free Democratic Party, and permission
to publish another paper. No GVN action was ever taken on either applica-
tion, but a number of Dr. Dan's followers in the new party were arrested.
When in March, 1959, the newspaper Tin Bac published an article by Dr. Dan,
it was closed down. In June, 1959, the newspaper Nguoi Viet Tu Do was
similarly indiscreet, and met the same fate. In August, 1959, Dr. Dan

ran for a seat in iis National Assembly, was elected by a six-to-one
margin over Diem's candidate running against him, but was disqualified

by court action before he could take his seat. Dr. Dan's career of opposi-
tion to Diem ended in November, 1960, when he became the political adviser
to the group who attempted a coup d'etat. Dan was arrested and jailed,

and remained there until the end of the Diem regime three years later.

3. The Caravelle Group, 1960
But Dr. Dan was an exceptionally bold antagonist of Diem.

No other politician dared what he did. Even he, however, was unable to
bring any unity to the opposition. Such other leaders as there were

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
