Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

13

Secretary McNaarara. The term as I am using it here refers to the
patrols in the Tonkin Gulf of which this was the fourth, one having
occurred in 1962, one in 1963, and the third in the early part of 1964,
and the fourth in August 1964. Actually it is a generic term covering
a broader range of patrols in the western Pacific but as used in this
paper it refers to the four patrols in the Tonkin Gulf.

second, were the attacks unprovoked ?

I have heard it suggested that the patrol provoked the attacks by
intruding into the territorial waters of North Vietnam. The facts, I
think, are these. ;

Prior to the first attack, on August 2, the I/addow had been engaged
on its patrol since July 31. At no time during the conduct of this patrol
did the Maddox depart from international waters. Tt had been in-
structed to approach the North Vietnamese coastline no closer than $
nautical miles and any offshore island no closer than 4 nautical miles.
Maddow adhered scrupulously to these instructions. When the patrol
resumed with Maddox and Turner Joy, the ships were instructed to
remain at least 11 miles from the coast. These instructions also were
followed. The United States recognizes no claim of a territorial sea
in excess of 3 miles. This consistent position of the United States was
reemphasized at the close of the 1960 Convention on Law of the Sea
in Geneya.

There haye, however, been statements reported in the press that the
Aaddox entered into waters claimed by North Vietnam as territorial.
Such statements have no basis in fact. At no time prior to the August
1964 Tonkin Gulf incidents did the North Vietnamese Government
claim a width of territorial sea in excess of 8 miles. The North Viet-
namese Gorernment sicceeded the French Government, which adhered
to-the 3-mile limit. Under the rules of international law, no claim by
North Vietnam in excess of 3 miles would be assumed unless specifically
made and published. It should be noted that Cambodia, a sister suc-
cessor state, publicly adopted the French 3-mile rule on achieving
independence. Later, it proclaimed a 5-mile limit. South Vietnam
claims 3 miles. The first statement of North Vietnam which approaches
a claim in excess of 3 miles occurred well after the attacks on Septem-
ber 1, 1964, in the form of a broadcast from Radio Hanoi in which it
was stated, “The Democratic Republic of Vietnam declared that the
territorial sea is 12 miles.” No official documentary confirmation of the
claim asserted in this broadeast is known to exist.

In short, at not time during the patrol did either of the destroyers
leave the high seas and enter areas claimed by the North Vietnamese
or recognized by the United States as national waters. .

The question might be asked, however: Should not we as a practical
matter have assumed a claim of 12 miles since this is the uniform posi-

-tion of the Communist countries? The simple answer is that Com-

munist countries do not have such a uniform position: Cuba and
Poland each adhere to the traditional 3-mile limit, while Yugoslavia
and Albania claim 10 miles. 2

SOUTH VIETNAMESE OPERATIONS

Another point relating to “provocation” was discussed and disposed
of during the debates on the Tonkin Gulf resolution and the hearings
prior thereto, but, of late, it seems to have been resurrected. It is the

a a a ee rr ee

RF i
