Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Closely related on the economic front was the GVN budget. Estimates
of the CY 1967 inflationary gap grew during the auarter from 14 to 20
billion piasters. 52/ The United States exercised only spotty influence
on their budget, specifically on those items receiving direct American
support; and general persuasion was used to hold down the overall limit.
Governor Hanh tried to transfer all US counterpart funds to the military
pudget with the explanation that only the US military could adequately
control the South Vietnamese military, but the guessing was that this
might also be his way of freeing GVN civilian agencies from any American
interference.

Washington efforts to get more information on the GVN budget only
prought educated guesses and a reminder that the Mission did not partici-
pate in a review of the GVN civil budget as was the practice for the
militery part. 53/ The CY 1967 budget of 75 billion piasters was issued
without prior discussion with AID. It was wnsatisfactory. USAID had the
leverage to negotiate because of counterpart funds and PL 480 receipts,
but the major problem was how to provide AID the necessary funding
mechanics to implement programs at levels sufficient to meet established
requirements. 5h/

10. The Saigon Port Again :

Severe congestion continued to plague the Port of Saigon. A drop in
CIP/GVN eargo discharged in December brought queries from Washington.
Saigon replied that the drop was due to the GVN port director's abortive
great barge experiment and listed a number of corrective steps taken.

In fact all were peripheral to the central problem, the failure of com-
mercial importers to remove their goods from crowded warehouses. Saigon
warned, ,

Any additional actions...would require high-level govern-
ment to government agreements which in our estimation
would not be eppropriste at this time. 55/

Highest authorities in Washington remained concerned and pressed for a
complete military takeover or at least a comprehensive alternate plan
which would demonstrably meet the problem. 56/ Saigon held back with
the view that progress was being made, that Ky was persueded of the need
to eliminate port congestion and that he was doing his utmost to solve
the problem. 57/ A US takeover was once again viewed as neither politi-
cally possible nor desirable. 58/ CINCPAC chimed in to support strongly
the Saigon position, 5 59/ and at the end of the quarter weneine ste was
still peppering Saigon with comment:

We here do not take same relaxed view of barge situation
Saigon port as Saigon...Highest authorities have been
consistently concerned. 60/

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
