Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

19

MONSTROUS INSINUATIONS

As a final point, I must address the suggestion that, a ty Aaa ee
the Government of the United States induced the sea ‘ie Ae
4 with the intent of providing an excuse to take the reta =e So ei
which we in fact took. I can only characterize such insinuations :
monstrous, PP win

The effective repulsion of the August 2 atteck on ie ae ee bat
relatively high cost to the small N orth Vietnamese 2 a zs nee Ree
cur protest which clearly and unequivocally warned o a Satie eas
Sequences of a recurrence, made us confident that anot ae Heke oe
unlikely, The published order of the President that , pene in the
should continue to assert the right of the Seon a hes Sani
Gulf of Tonkin, and setting forth the composition me ae re Sue Nae
have served to avoid any further misunderstanding. =18 the I Bites
sumed the ships were ordered to remain 11 miles from ay ae ee
lieu of the 8 miles ordered on the previous patrols, hardly inc mt
of an intent to induce another ae Asa matter of suet me seule 16
initiative the two ships approached the coastline no Aaecteniite tnt
iniles during their patrol, But beyond that, I find it Mie ces ae Cave
anyone even remotely familiar with our society anc Shiol Tonka:
ernment could suspect the existence of a ORs peeye terte We lin the
clude almost, if not ail, the entire chain of ee eae es
Pacific, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Stat, ¢ ae oat. Se
the Secretary of Defense, and his chief civilian assistants, Sec
tary of State, and the President of the United States. Sthsvey hen:

Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement, and I will be very he
py to try to answer any questions. yee.

The Cramatay. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. eos with recnrd to

I would like to have a’ few preliminary questions th : e Hint
the situation under which this whole ailair took place. I don
they are very difficult to answer,

INTERNAL TROUBLES OF KHANIT GOVERNMENT

ae ee teneral Khanh
Mr. Secretary, is it true that the gov ate eh of ce eee Hone
which oyerthreyy the Minh junta in Lee 1964 was In se
ble by the spring and early summer of 1964? . .
: SAN eariy Sumi te sider: ssension
Secretary McoNaarana. I think there was ene on
among the members of the government, Mr, etek ERIEGE Chat
then and later a series of changes in the government as a resul
dissension. : Sand
a = OVTs "ess, ANC
The Cuanaray. Did you not say recently ae eae iin wae
T quote: “Three and a half years ago the South Vie 1 a aie forces
on the verge of defeat. The North Vietnamese anc g
were on the verge of victory.”
Is that accurate? - Ce eeE
ea avant : si zat : ses ated
Secretary McNaarara. Mr. Chairman, if Isa ees eae act
the date. What I was talking about—I think ca : Seam adic
cast I specifically referred to it, was July 1960. 1 s ayer re Si
and a half years ago. That was the Sas aes as oe
The Cramray. That isa quote from Just 2 weeks ago. ;
Secretary McNaarana, Tt may be, Mr. Chairman. I a eee og
have the full transeript of what I said. I believe I mentally ded ctedt
