Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"National Reconciliation,” on November 1, a national holiday. As noted

above, Washington wanted and got a public commitment on this subject at
Manila. 5/

Then on November 1, the promised proclamation failed to appear;
instead, there was a vague reference to it in a speech on other subjects.
When the Embassy inguired, Ky said the speech had to be prepared very
carefully, and that he had not had time before November 1; he promised
he would have the speech and proclamation ready in early December. Lodge
found this explanation hard to swallow, but had to accept it. When "early
December" arrived, there was a dead silence; and the end of this exercise
was not yet in sight. 6/

3. More Hard Bargaining on Economic Policy and the Port
October - December 1966

Economic policy negotiations had the same flavor as those relating
to National Reconciliation. The USG was dissatisfied, in the third
quarter 1966, as noted, on the lack of GVN follow-up on budgetary and
foreign exchange promise in June following the IMF agreement. And in the
fall, the Saigon Port congestion problem grew serious again; the June
agreement had not gone far enough.

At the end of September, Governor Hanh of the RVN National Bank came
to Washington to negotiate specifics on economic policy. During the
negotiations, Komer cabled Lodge;

fie are pressing evn / hard to agree to spend rapidly grow-
ing foreign exchange reserves on imports. Otherwise, it
will appear and rightly so, that GVN is getting rich at US
taxpayer's expense. It is apparent that GVN's chief reluc-
tance on this score is that Thanh/Hanh want to squirrel
away reserves for postwar rehabilitation in case US goes
away and leaves them.

In the upshot, however, they reached only a vague and general agreement,
on October 6, the most specific item being that GVN would limit its in-
flationary gap to 10 billion piasters in 1967. Dollar balances were
deferred to later negotiations. 8/

There was some effort to resolve disagreements on economic matters
and the Port just before the Manila Conference, but no progress. Komer
went to Saigon after the Conference and, essisting Porter in the negoti-
ations, reached the following agreement with GVN on November 2:

(1) GVN will use all gold and foreign exchange available
to it in excess of $250 million, not including commercial
pank working balances, to finance invisibles and imports,
including import categories now financed by the US.

(2) GVN will plece at least $120 million of its reserves
in US doller instruments of at least 2 year maturity.

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
