Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

intervention in support of General Giap's forces, asked the Ambassador
point-blank for U.S. action, saying that "the fate of Southeast Asia
now rested on Dien Bien Phu,” and that "Geneva would be won or lost
depending on outcome" of the battle. 17/ ‘The United States was now
being called upon to act quickly and unilaterally to save a local situ-
ation, rather than, as Dulles desired, in concert with Asian and
Western Allies.

d.° U.S. Decision Not to Intervene Unilaterally

In the first week of April it became clear that the question
of U.S. intervention was now crucial. Fighting at Dien Bien Phu reached
major proportions as Chinese-supplied artillery pounded the French and
drove them backwards. Without an early intervention by an external power,
or group of powers, the French position at Dien Bien Phu was likely to be
overrun. In anticipation of the French request for intervention, the
Eisenhower Administration decided to consult with Congressional leaders.
The President appears to have thought that Congressional support was vital
for whatever active role the U.S. might now take in Indochina.

Available Government documents do not provide details of the
two meetings to be described below. However, on the basis of seemingly
reliable published sources, it appears that on April 3 Secretary Dulles
and Admiral Radford met with eight Congressmen (three Republicans and
five Democrats) at the State Department. 18/ Radford apparently outlined
a plan for an air strike on the Vietnam People's Army (VPA) at Dien Bien
Phu using 200 planes from the aircraft carriers Essex and Boxer, stationed
on maneuvers in the South China Sea. An unsuccessful air strike might
need to be followed by a second air strike, but ground forces were not
envisaged at this stage. It has been averred that there were atomic
bombs on the aircraft carriers which could be delivered by the planes,
but there is no indication that there was any serious consideration given
to using nuclear weapons at Dien Bien Phu or elsewhere in Indochina. In
the event of a massive Chinese troop intervention, however, it is quite
possible that the U.S. would have retaliated with strategic nuclear
weapons against targets in China.

The Congressional leaders raised questions about the amount
of allied support for such an action, about the position of the other
Joint Chiefs, about the need for ground forces if a second air strike
also failed, and about the danger of a mammoth Chinese intervention which
could transform Indochina into another Korean-type war. Radford apparently
was forced to admit that he was the only one of the Joint Chiefs who
favored the intervention plan. Dulles conceded that the allies had not
as yet been consulted. In consequence, Dulles, who had been thinking of
a joint Congressional resolution authorizing Presidential use of U.S. air-
naval power in Indochina (which it is alleged he had ready in his pocket)
left the meeting without the vital support he needed. The Congressional
leaders laid dow three conditions necessary for their support: (a)
formation of an allied "coalition"-type force; (b) a French declaration

B-23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
