Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

party were changed in order to guarantee the leadership and
forces of the Party under the new struggle conditions....

"From the end of 1954 until 1956 several important changes
occurred in the South Vietnam situation. Imperialist America
ousted and replaced imperialist France, turning South Vietnam
into a colony (a new type of colony) based on U.S. military
power. The Ngo Dinh Diem government was clearly shown to be a
government composed of bureaucratic, dictatorial and family-
controlled feudalists and capitalists who committed crimes for
the American imperialists and massacred the people, massacred
revolutionaries and massacred the oppositionists. Both the
Americans and Diem made every effort to oppose the implementation
of the Geneva Agreement and made every effort to subvert the
peaceful reunification of our fatherland....

"Immediately after the re-establishment of peace, the responsi-
bility of South Vietnam was to use the political struggle to
demand the implementation of the Geneva Agreement. The struggle
responsibilities and procedures were appropriate for the situation
at that time and corresponded with the desires of the great majority
of the masses who wished for peace after nearly 10 years of diffi-
cult resistance.

"At that time, although the Americans-Diemists used cruel force
to oppose the people and the revolution, and the masses struggled
decisively against this repression in many places and at many times,
the contradictions had not yet developed to a high degree and the
hatred had not yet developed to a point where the use of armed
struggle could become an essential and popular struggle tactic.

In South Vietnam since 1955, thanks to the armed movement of the
sects, we were able to avoid the construction of an armed propa-
ganda force, since we only had a few former bases which were needed
in the political struggle and for the creation of a reserve force.

"From 1957 to 1958, the situation gradually changed. The enemy
persistently sabotaged the implementation of the Geneva Agreement,
actively consolidated and strengthened the army, security service,
and administrative apparatus from the central to the hamlet level,
erudely assassinated the people, and truly and efficiently destroyed
our Party. By relying on force, the American-Diemist regime was
temporarily able to stabilize the situation and increase the prestige
of the counterrevolutionaries. At this time, the political struggle
movement of the masses, although not defeated, was encountering
increasing difficulty and increasing weakness; the Party bases,
although not completely destroyed, were significantly weakened, and
in some areas, quite seriously; the prestige of the masses and of
the revolution suffered. But in reality, the years during which
the enemy increased his terrorism were also the years in which the
enemy suffered major political losses and the social contradictions
which existed became increasingly evident; the resentment of the

52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
