Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Of particular interest in the Combined Campaign Plan is the
emphasis given to Revolutionary Development. The concept for this
was as follows:

&- Strategic Concept.

(1) The GVN strategic concept for defeating the
vc/NVA forces and building a viable, free nation includes
three separate but mutually supporting operations as follows:

(a) A military offensive conducted by RVNAF
and US/IWMAF to defeat the VC/NVA military forces.

(b) Revolutionary development conducted by
RVNAF and GVN civil elements, with the assistance of US/
FWMAF and US/FW civil agencies, to establish and maintain
security in populated areas and extend legal government
control over these areas.

(c) Nation building conducted by GVN civil
elements, with the assistance of US/FW civil agencies, to
complete the development of nationwide political, economic,
and social institutions necessary for a viable, free, non-
communist Republic of Vietnam.

(2) The three operations will take place coneur-
rently. In areas where there is adequate government control,
nation building will be in progress. In other areas, RD will
be underway, while in less secure areas, the military offen-
Sive will be prosecuted. Previously, the military offensive
dominated national efforts; however, during 1967, RD will
receive increasingly greater emphasis. With regard to the
military offensive, priority of effort will be given to
destroying the enemy forces in those areas where RD is
expected to be carried out in the future. Offensive opera-
tions also will be conducted to prevent major VC/NVA main
forces from interfering in RD and nation building programs

that are in progress. TY

However, as the year wore on, attention was increasingly focused toward
the border regions and the problems of halting enemy infiltration from
sanctuaries ovtside South Vietnam. This is reflected in the operations
just south of the DMZ in the I Corps, west of Pleiku, and Kontum in

the II Corps, and the movement towards War Zone C in III Corps.

In I CTZ, by the end of October, the NVA 324B Division again
was drawn back across the IMZ. Intelligence indicated that the 32n
Division had been relieved by the NVA 31st and had withdrawn north
of the DMZ. The 34st was in and just north of the DMZ near the

122 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
