Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. PROGRAM No. 3

A. Interlude

As far as the actual conduct of ground operations in Vietnam was
concerned, the period of time from 1 May 1965 to 1 November 1965 was
spent in building up combat and logistical forces and learning to employ
them effectively. This was followed by a period from 1 November 1965 to
1 May 1966, in which the deployment of U.S. forces was extended toward
the frontiers, logistical support was exercised in furnishing support to
troops in sustained combat, and commanders were indoctrinated on the
techniques of sustained ground combat.

The nvA/ve avoided initiating actions which might result in
large and unacceptable casualties from the firepower of Allied
forces. During the year the enemy became increasingly cautious
in the face of increased Allied strength. The enemy tended to
attack only when he had overwhelming superiority of numbers,
such as during the attack in March on the Special Forces outpost
at A Shau. VC tactics were designed to conserve main force
strengths for the most opportune targets. The NvA/VC avoided
attacking large Allied units of regiment or brigade size, but
did attack isolated battalions and companies using sufficient
strength to insure great numerical superiority. It was typical
of the enemy to attack with one-third of his available force
and to employ the remaining two-thirds of the units to set up
an ambush of the Allied relief column. During attacks the
nva/ve used a-hugging tactic as a means of protecting them-
selves from Allied artillery and air strikes. The enemy often
withdrew by small squad-sized increments, using multiple routes.
To defend against surveillance and artillery and air strikes,
the enemy dispersed into the jungle in small units, moved fre-
quently, and made maximum use of darkness and periods of low
visibility... 1/

It is interesting to note, however, the pattern formed by MACV's
operations during 1966. In the I Corps area, the large-scale operations
conducted by the Marines in the spring of the year were for the most
part located along the coast of the southern part of the area, in the
Provinces of Quang Tin and Quang Neai.

Beginning with Operation DOUBIE EAGLE I (28 January to 17 February),
they progressed through DOUBLE EAGLE II (19 February to 1 March);
Operation UTAH (4: March); Operation TEXAS (18 March); and Operation
HOT SPRINGS on 21 April. All of these operations were keyed on intelli-
gence Of an enemy build-up in and around Quang Neai. Contact on these
operations ranged from sporadic to contact with a NVA regiment on Opera-
tion UTAH. The major exception to the location of operations in this area
was Operation OREGON which was conducted in the vicinity of Thua Thien in
late March. .

h6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
