Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Agreement (Article 34) and cited in the Conference Declaration

(Article 7). While a Joint Commission of French and Viet Minh military
officers was set up to deal with the cease-fire and force regroupment,
the International Commission for Supervision and Control (ICC) furnished
by Poland, India, and Canada, was to oversee the Accords in general.

Its inability to cope with violations of the Armistice in the handling
of would-be migrants, vociferously proclaimed in both Saigon and Hanoi,
impugned its competence to overwatch the general free elections, for
which it was also to be responsible.

Equally serious for the Settlement, the ICC was expected to control
arms and guarantee against aggression. The armistice agreement signed
by the French and the Viet Minh, and affirmed in the several declara-
tions of the Geneva Conference, included four main provisions for arms
control: (1) arms, bases, and armed forces were to be fixed at the level
existing in Vietnam in July 195}, with allowance for replacement of worn
or damaged equipment, and rotation of personnel; (2) further foreign
influences were to be excluded, either in the form of alliances, or
foreign military bases established in either North or South Vietnam;

(3) neither party was to allow its zone to be used for the renewal of
aggression; and, (4) all the foregoing were to be overseen by the ICC.

As was the case of the regroupment provisions, these arrangements
operated in practice to the detriment of the political solution embodied
in the Accords, for the ICC, the election guardian, was soon demonstrated
to be impotent.

The level of arms in Vietnam in 1954 was unascertainable. The Viet
Minh had been surreptitiously armed, principally by the Chinese, from
1950 onward. That Viet Minh forces were acquiring large amount of
relatively advanced weaponry was fully evident at Dien Bien Phu, but
neither the DRV nor its allies owned to this military assistance. After
the 195) armistice, French, U.S., and British intelligence indicated
that the flow of arms into North Vietnam from China continued on a scale
far in excess of "replacement" needs. Similarly, while U.S. military
materiel had been provided to the French more openly, no one -- neither
the French, the Vietnamese, the U.S., nor certainly the ICC -- knew how
much of this equipment was on hand and serviceable after 1954. The
issue of arms levels was further complicated by regroupment, French
withdrawals, and the revamping of the national army in South Vietnam.
The ICC could determine to no one's satisfaction whether the DRV was
within its rights to upgrade the armament of the irregulars it brought
out of South Vietnam. Similarly, though the DRV charged repeatedly
that the U.S. had no right to be in South Vietnam at all, the ICC had
to face the fact that U.S. military advisors and trainers had been present
in Vietnam since 1950 under a pentilateral agreement with Laos, Cambodia,
Vietnam, and France. If France withdrew its cadres in Vietnamese units,
could they not be "replaced" by Americans? And if the French were with-
drawing both men and equipment in large quantities, did not Vietnam have
a right under the Accords to replace them in kind with its own, American-
equipped formations? To DRV charges and GVN countercharges, the ICC

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
