Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the papers, and on the 7th Ky promised publicly to remove Chi. Lodge
played no role in starting this episode, and told the Mission Council
on October 7 that he did not want it repeated. After a six-weeks delay,
Ky did remove Chi on November 25, and gave him a job in the Ministry oe
Defense. AID to the province resumed. 28/

Advisers in the field kept on complaining about the delays in the
Vietnamese system, and pressed for restoration of some resources of
their own. On October 1, 1965, MACV began giving its sector and sub-
sector advisers piaster funds they could spend on urgent projects. Hach
subsector adviser had access to 50,000 piasters which could be replenished
as necessary. Toward the end of 1965 it became obvious that this method
was highly successful. Consideration was given to permanent establishment
of the revolving fund. 29/

However, after the trial period of about four months MACV abandoned
the plan because of strong opposition by General Thang, Minister of
Revolutionary Development. He argued that under U.S. urging he had been
developing an effective, flexible organization that would take care of
urgent projects of the type the sector and subsector advisers wanted to
promote; letting them bypass his people would encourage the latter to
lapse into their old bad habits and thwart both governments' main objec-
tives. 30/

USOM also had second thoughts about abandoning the sign-off system.
Early in October 1965, the Mission Council approved a plan to restore the
"troika sign-off" procedure as it had existed prior to June. After the
Mission had already reopened the issue with the GV, 31/ the State
Department objected, saying that the United States wanted to make the
Vietnamese more independent and effective. :

After a time the frustrations of the advisers began striking a
sympathetic chord at the highest levels. In a draft memorandum to the
President dated November 3, 1965, Secretary McNamara stated his own im~
patience with the GVIl and urged a more active role for our advisers at
province and district. There is no sign of such high-level interest
earlier, except as expressed by decisions to extend the advisory system
to lower levels; as just noted State objected to the restoration of

_ troika sign-off on October 16, 1965.

Some uncertainty and disagreement with respect to pacification de-
veloped within United States groups in Vietnam. In November, Major General
Lansdale, Special Assistant to the Ambassador, asked who on the U.S. side
should have the executive role in dealing with the Rural Construction
Ministry? Lansdale envisaged that MACV and JUSPAOQ would be observers only.

COMUSMACV disagreed with the proposed limitation. USMACV was the
only structure advising GVN at all levels; so MACV. shared responsibility
for pacification. Manpower required for cadre teams would impact directly

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
