Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

faster pace in its later versions may have been an attempt to make a
clear distinction between it and the new "C." Use of the term
"fast/full squeeze" in reference to Option B began concurrently with
; descriptions of the stiffer version of Option C. 70/

In addition, it is possible that the emphasis on a fast-paced
"B," with its harsher measures, was motivated in part by a desire to
make this option unsttractive to higher authority. This may explain the
rather perplexed tone of the previously cited Mustin comment comparing
the JCS and Working Group approaches. Other than the JCS member, most
of the Working Group members appear to have favored less intensive
pressures than those being advocated by the military. Despite a sense
of high stakes in Southeast Asia, which was shared by several members
and other interested officials, many of these persons did not want the
United Stetes to plunge ahead with deeply committing actions as long as
there was some doubt sbout the GVN's durability end commitment. 71/

Not incompatible with the foregoing argument is a possible
additional explanation for the stiffening of Option C. As U.S. objec-
tives came to be viewed somewhat less flexibly, it is possible that
dominant elements in the Working Group thought it advisable to make
"c" into a tougher position, There is little question that Option C
was the natural heir of the concept of graduated pressures coupled with
a negotiated settlement advocated at several points earlier in the year.
Several of the Working Group members had been instrumental in shaping
those proposals and were quite naturally attached to them conceptually.
Now, advocates of the graduated approach were confronted with: (1)
greater pressures from the JCS and their like-thinkers in the Congress;
(2) recognition of little flexibility among Administration officials
regarding interpretations of national interest and objectives; and (3)
an increasingly critical situation in South Vietnam. It is likely that
thet these individuals viewed it necessary to stiffen their preferred
apEreseh in order to improve its compatibility with the current policy
climate.

Whatever the reasons, the options for review end discussions
were somewhat more closely alike than the original conceptions had been.
Option A provided for intensified efforts to improve the situation in
South Vietnam and for somewhat intensified militery actions in line with
eurrent policy. Inside South Vietnam it provided for improvements in
the GVN edministrative performance and for strengthening different ele-
ments of the pacification program. These internal actions were stressed
as necessary regardless of whatever other measures were decided on.
Option A's provisions for measures outside the country included: (1)
eontinuing and increasing the GVIi's covert maritime harassment program;
(a) resuming the DE SOTO Patrol operations; (3) increasing the scope of
Laotian 1-28 attacks on infiltration targets in Laos and (4) when feasible>
undertaking small-scale cross-border GVN ground and air operations into

: coer TOP SECRET - Sensitive
