Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

are consistent with our own highest interests. There are
greater hazards in not advising a potential enemy of what he
can expect of us, and in failing to disabuse him of assumptions
which might lead to a miscalculation of our intentions."

To the contrary, a statement before the Foreign Relations Com-~
mittee by Secretary Dulles himself can be cited to demonstrate more
modest, less obligatory designs:

"I might say in this connection, departing sanewhat
from order of my presentation, that it is not the policy of
the United States to attempt to deter attack in this area by
building up a local force capable itself of defense against
an all-out attack by the Chinese Communists if it should occur.
We do not expect to duplicate in this area the pattern of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and its significant standing
forces. That would require a diversion and commitment of
strength which we do not think is either practical or desir-
able or necessary from the standpoint of the United States.

"We believe that our posture in that area should be one
of having mobile striking power, and the ability to use that
against the sources of aggression if it occurs. We believe
that is more effective than if we tried to pin down American
forces at the many points around the circumference of the
Communist world in that area.

"It may very well be that other countries of the area will
want to dedicate particular forces for the protection of the
area under this treaty. But we made clear at Manila that it
was not the intention of the United States to build up a large
local force including, for example, United States ground troops
for that area, but that we rely upon the deterrent power of
our mobile striking force."

By looking into the words of the treaty in the light of its origins
and the interests of the U.S. as perceived in 1954, and by comparing
these with NATO language, origins, and development, it is possible to
make a tentative judgment on the issue of obligation. Whereas it is
clear that NATO was intended for deterrence against aggression and
defense with U.S. forces should deterrence fail, SEATO seems to have
been designed with a view only toward deterrence. Defense, especially
with U.S. ground forces, was not seriously contemplated.

There are tnree pieces of evidence in support of this contentious
conclusion: (1) the stringent preconditions which the U.S. delegation
to the Manila Conference to establish SEATO were instructed to insist
upon; (2) the lack of institutional and force structure development in
SEATO as compared to NATO; and (3) the fact that SEATO and NATO treaty
terminology differ in respect to the use of force and other matters.

_ 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
