Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

+. oe a ee oa Cal bias ob
(. ee vd! eee ee ud sa
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE .

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

2 15 January 1969

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

THROUGH: Mr. Paul C. Warnke, ASD/ISA
Dr. Morton H. Halperin, DASD/Policy Planning and Arms Control /ISA

SUBJECT: Final Report, OSD Vietnam Task Force

On June 17, 1967, Secretary Robert S. McNamara directed that a Task Force
be formed to study the history of United States involvement in Vietnam
from World War II to the present. Mr. McNamara's guidance was simply to
do studies that were "encyclopedic and objective." With six full-time
professionals assigned to the Task Force, we were to: complete our work in

“ three months. A year and a half later, and with the involvement of six

_ times six professionals, we are finally done to the tune of thirty-seven

studies and fifteen collections of documents contained in forty-three volumes.

In the beginning, Mr. McNamara gave the Task Force full access to OSD files,
and the Task Force received access to CIA materials, and some use of State
Department cables and memoranda. We had no access to White House files.

Our guidance prohibited personal interviews with any of the principal partici-
pants.

_- —The result was not so much a documentary history, as a history based solely
on documents -- checked and rechecked with ant-like diligence. Pieces of
paper, formidable and suggestive by themselves, could have meant much or ‘nothing.
Perhaps this document was never sent anywhere, and perhaps that one, though
commented upon, was irrelevant. Without the memories of people to tell us,
we were certain to make mistakes. Yet, using those memories might have been
misleading as well. This approach to research was bound to lead to distortions,
and distortions we are sure abound in these studies.

To bring the documents to life, to fill in gaps, and just to see what the
“outside world" was thinking, we turned to newspapers, periodicals, and books.
We never used these sources to supplant the classified documents, but only to
supplement them. And because these documents, sometimes written by very clever
men who knew so much and desired to say only a part and sometimes written very
openly but also contradictorily, are not immediately self-revealing or self-
explanatory, we tried both to have a number of researchers look at them and

to quote passages liberally. Moreover, when we felt we could be challenged
with taking something out of context, we included the whole paper in the
Documentary Record section of the Task Force studies (Parts V and VI. A and B).
_Again seeking to fend off inevitable mistakes in interpretation and context,
what seemed to us key documents were reviewed and included in several over-
lapping in substance, but separate, studies.

eet er UNCLASSIFIED
gs es rely WHEN SEPARATED FROM
ewe id Bites we ENCLOSURE .
