Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Country X, if you like, is South Viet-Nem. North Viet-Nam is
trying to seize South Viet-Nam by force.

"Country Y is, perhaps, Laos. We had an agreement on Laos in
1962 under which there would be no North Vietnamese forces in Iaos.
And Laos would not be used as a route of infiltration into South Viet-
Nam. That has not been performed. And the government that we agreed
on in Geneva in 1962 has not been permitted to exercise authority
throughout Laos. And the International Control Commission has not
been permitted to exercise its functions in the Communist-held areas
of Iaos. So, undoubtedly, there are appetites with respect to Laos.

"Country Z is, perhaps, already Thailand. The other side has
announced that they are going after Thailand. There are subversive
guerrilla elements in northeast Thailand trained outside. There's a
Thai training camp now in North Viet-Nam preparing additional guerrillas
to go into Thailand.

"So, there's no need for something called the domino theory.

"The theory is that proclaimed in Peking repeatedly, that the world
revolution of communism must be advanced. by militant means. Now, if
they can be brought toward an sttitude of peaceful coexistence, if the
second generation in China can show some of the prudence that the second
generation in the Soviet Union has shown, then, maybe, we can begin to
build a durable peace there.

"Mr. Harsch: Mr. Secretary, the Secretary-General of the U.N. also
in that same news conference said, 'I do not subscribe to the view that
South Viet-Nam is strategically vital to Western interests and Western
security.’ What are our vital strategic interests in the area? Do you
regard Viet-Nam as vital?

‘Secretary Rusk: Well, there are important geographical features,
natural resources, large numbers of people in Southeast Asia.

"J think the heart of the matter is, again, the phenomenon of aggres-
sion. And if the momentum of aggression should begin to roll in that part
of the world, stimulated or supported or engaged in by those who are com-
mitted to the spread of the world revolution by violence, then that seems
to put us back on the trail that led us into World War II.

"What is important is that all nations, large and small, have a
chance to live ummolested by their neighbors, as provided in the United
Nations Charter.

"Article 1 of the charter deals with acts of aggression, breaches of

the peace, the necessity for peaceful settlement of disputes. Article 2
of the charter is about the self-determination of people. These are

D-100
