Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

lodge replied to the new policy guidance on September 19 in a
generally negative vein. 105/ The proposals for specific actions by
the GVIi had all been previously suggested to Diem without any results,

- and Lodge was not optimistic about their adoption now. He specifically
felt that he shovld not be required to make a futile overture to Diem.
The Ambassador's aloofness was beginning to cause official concern at
the palace, and he felt he should press views on the Ngo family only when
they initiated the contact. He did not think a public relations effort
was likely to have any effect on the regime, whose appreciation of
questions of public support was virtually nil. Withholding aid was
another delicate matter that did not offer great prospects of success.

' Lodge was particuarly concerned thet such action would impede the war
effort or damage the economy, but heve no real effect on the regime.

No doubt recalling the generals' previous request for an aid suspension
as a sign of U.S. support, Lodge expressed his view that any suspension
of aid should be timed to coincide with another coup attempt and should
be used to facilitate it. He was troubled by the opinion expressed by
both General Minh and Secretary Thuan privately within the previous two
days that the war was going very badly and the VC were winning. In
general, he felt that a patient "let them come to me” tactic was more
likely to have results, unless a real coup possibility emerged, which
he felt we should back.

4, The McNamara-Taylor Mission

The second decision to come out of the September 17 NSC meeting was
to adopt a suggestion of Secretary McNamara for another fact-finding
mission, this time by himself and General Taylor, Chairman of the JCS. 106/

Lodge reacted immediately to the proposed McNamara-Taylor mission,
pointing out to the President that such a visit would require a call on
Diem that would be construed by the regime as a return to business as
usval. 107/ Since he had been consciously pursuing a policy of official
aloofness, he wondered whether such a high level visit was desirable.
Furthermore, it coincided with the proposed National Assembly elections
on September 27, and could not but be construed as an indication of the
lack of importance we attached to them. But the President was insistent,
and Lodge acquiesced, suggesting that the public announcement state that
Lodge had requested the visit. 108/ After an exchange of alternative
phraseology, it was agreed that the release would say that the President
had decided to send the mission after consultation with Lodge. It was soa
announced on September 21. 109/

The President's instructions to Melemara described the purpose of
the mission in the following terms:

I am asking you to go because of my desire to have the
best possible on-the-spot appreisal of the military and
paramilitary effort to defeat the Viet Cong....The events
in South Vietnam since May have now raised serious questions

30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
