Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. DESOTO AS A REPRISAL OPPORTUNITY -- AND THE DECISION TO SUSPEND

Detailed and specific reprisal preparations had been under way for
many months prior to February 1965, most prominently in connection with
the periodic DESOTO Patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin. The patrols were
suspended after the August 2 and 4, 1964 incidents, when the destroyer
patrol group had been fired upon, giving rise to the first U.S. retalia-
tory strikes. They were resumed on 12 September, and at that time were
believed to have been again attacked, or at least "menaced," by unfriendly
vessels on the night of 18 September. That incident, however, was con-
sidered as too ambiguous by Washington officials to justify a reprisal
action. The patrol was once more suspended on 20 September.

In order to be properly prepared for an attack on any future patrol,
military authorities began to work up a pre-packaged set of reprisal
targets that might be politically acceptable, with pre-assigned forces
that would be in a high state of readiness to strike these targets, and
with a detailed strike plan thst would provide a range of retaliatory
options. Accordingly, CINCPAC, on instructions from the JCS, developed
appropriate plans and issued a series of Fragmentary Operations Orders
under the colorful caption, "Punitive and Crippling Reprisal Actions on
Targets in NVN.” 25/ The orders provided for air strikes to be conducted
against selected targets in North Vietnam in retailation for DRV attacks
against the DESOTO Patrol, if the patrol were resumed and attacked. Tro
levels of retaliation response were prescribed, with two target options
each (all located: south of the 19th parallel), with the various options
scaled to the extent and severity of damage inflicted upon the patrol.

A high alert posture was to be maintained during the days the patrol was
in progress, such that the strikes could be launched within one hour
after receipt of the execution order. The retaliatory forces were to be
carefully prepositioned and rules of engagement were meticulously spelled

out. 26/

While these preparations were initially associated exclusively with
the DESOTO Patrol, it was recognized that reprisals might also be called
for in retaliation for any type of serious provocation which could occur
without warning, could be caused by the DRV or by the VC, and might be’
directed against US or GVN forces. But the high alert status ordered
in connection with the DESOTO Patrols could be maintained for only short
periods of time. A more sustained capability was also needed, and the JCS
prepared an outline plan for further elaboration by CINCPAC, calling for
a more limited reprisal action that could be launched with the least
possible delay with forces in place and with a readiness posture normally
maintained. 27/ The forces expected to be available for such strikes were
one CVA air wing, two squadrons of B-57, two squadrons of F-105, three
squadrons of F-100, and approximately one squadron of VNAF A-1H; and the
targets considered most suitable were:

; 1G TOP SECRET - Sensitive
