Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Alternative No. 1 -- Give /Deputy Ambassador/ Porter

operational control over all pacification activity...
Alternative No. 2 =~ Retain the present separate civil

and military command channels but strengthen the management
structure of both MACV and the U.S. Mission....

Alternative No. -- Assign responsibility for

civil and military, to COMUSMACV.

Mr. Komer's categorization was prescient. Ambassador Lodge's personal.
preference and the fact that most pacification advisors were military
seemed to rule out the first course of action. 167/ The second alter-
native described essentially the organization followed under the Office
of Civil Operations (0CO) from November 1966 until June 1967. By this
late date the U.S. decided to follow the third of Komer's alternatives.

cification,

The first of these reorganizations, that which created OCO, was
quite literally forced wpon Ambassador Lodge. Particularly in view of
the fact that OCO was to be given only a 90-120 day trial to produce
identifiable results, he was not eager to undergo the turmoil and lost
motion of one major reorganization only as a prelude to yet another
reorganization. He wanted to retain as much non-military flavor to the
pacification effort as possible -- regarding it as complementary to
nilitary programs, yet separate from them. Military security activities
were, in his view, essentially the negative precondition to pacification
activities which were the positive acts leading the GVN to vitalize
itself at the same time that it developed real ties to its own people. 168/

CORDS REPLACES OCO

Thus OCO entered the world foredoomed by the combination of too
short a prescribed life span and the tendency of some of its unwilling
partners to do more than support it tacitly while they maneuvered to
get their blue chips into another basket. Secretary McNamara had recom-
mended in October 1966 that MACV take responsibility for pacification.
Undersecretary of State Katzenbach had marshalled a strong case against
this step at least until embassy leadership of civil operations was given
a chance. The upshot was that it was given half a chance ~-- which may
have been worse than none at all.

OCO did, however, accomplish the creation and selection of Regional
Directors and OCO Province Representatives. One individual was made
responsible for all civil operations in each Corps Tactical Zone (CTZ)
and in each province. The U.S, military chain of command had already
adapted itself to parallel the RVNAF organization, but below Corps level
it was more complex. Each division within ARVN was advised by a senior
advisor (a colonel) who was given supervisory authority over the mili-
tary Sector (Province) Advisors within the Divisional Tactical Area (DIA)

Tt TOP SECRET - Sensitive
