Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

working people, to the intellectuals, the industrialists, and
trades, national minorities, religious communities, democratic
personalities, patriotic armymen, and young men and women in
South Vietnam.

‘Addressing the Vietnamese living abroad, the manifesto
called on them "to turn their thoughts to the beloved motherland
and actively contribute to the sacred struggle for national
emancipation." ' "

It is clear that the NLF was not intended as an exclu-
sively communist enterprise. Rather it was designed to encompass anti-
GVN activists, and to exploit the bi-polar nature of politics within
South Vietnam. In the period 1954-1960, prior to the NLF's "creation,'
the objectives of insurgents in the South, other than overthrow of My-
Diem, were vague. Communists in the South no doubt shared the overall
objectives of the DRV, and were aiming at unification of all Vietnam
under the Hanoi government. Some rebel nationalists were no doubt aware
of the communists' ambitions, but would have regarded such an outcome
as acceptable, if not desirable. Others, disillusioned by the actions
of the Diem regime after 1956, simply looked toward the establishnent of
a genuine democratic government in the South. Some peasants may have
been fighting to rid themselves of government, or to oppose modernization,
looking only to village autonomy. The sects, if not struggling for a
democratic regime, were fighting for their independence, as were some of
the tribal groups who chose to join the NLF. The National Liberation
Front formulated and publicly articulated objectives for all these.

Subsequent editions of the NLF Manifesto differed in
two substantive respects. George Carver reported that:

"On February 11, 1961, Hanoi devoted a second broadcast
to the N.L.F.'s manifesto and program, blandly changing the
language of both to tone down the more blatant Communist
terminology of the initial version. However, even the milder
second version (which became the ‘official’ text) borrowed
extensively from Le Duan's September speech [a the Third
National Congress of the lao Dong Party in Hanoi/ and left
little doubt about the Front's true sponsors or objectives." 167/

The "tone down" of communism was fairly subtle, if Hanoi so intended

its revision, since the alterations consisted mainly in additions to the
Ten Points of phraseology drawn from the preamble of the Manifesto;
references to “agrarian reform,' in those termis,were, however, cut. There
was a marked increase in condemnatory citations of "My-Diem," so that, in
eight of ten points in the action program, expelling the U.S. was clearly
identified as the way the desired goal would be reached. 168/

Pike refers to an "organizing congress" of the NLF held
in December, 1960, of 60 participants, at which plans were announced for

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
