Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The people who worked on the Task Force were superb--uniformly bright and
interested, although not always versed in the art of research. We had a
sense of doing something important and of the need to do it right. Of course,
we all had our prejudices and axes to grind and these shine through clearly
at times, but we tried, we think, to suppress or compensate for them.

These outstanding people came from everywhere--the military services, State,
OSD, and the "think tanks." Some came for a month, for three months, for

six months, and most were unable, given the unhappiness of their superiors,
to finish the studies they began. Almost all the studies had several authors,
each heir dutifully trying to pick up the threads of his predecessor. In all,
we had thirty-six professionals working on these studies, with an average of
four months per man. :

The guality, style and interest of the studies varies considerably. The
papers in Parts I, II, ITI, and IV.A, concerning the years 1945 to 1961 tend
to be generally non-startling--although there are many interesting tidbits.
Because many of the documents in this period were lost or not kept (except
for the Geneva Conference era) we had to rely more on outside resources.
From 1961 onwards (Parts IV.B and C and VI.C), the records were bountiful,
especially on the first Kennedy year in office, the Diem coup, and on the
‘subjects of the deployment of ground forces, the decisions surrounding the
bombing campaign against North Vietnam, US-GVN relations, and attempts at
negotiating a settlement of the conflict.

Almost all the studies contain both a Summary and Analysis and a Chronology.
The chronologies highlight each important event or action in the monograph
by means of date, description, and documentary source. The Summary and
Analysis sections, which I wrote, attempt to capture the main themes and
facts of the monographs--and to make some judgments and speculations which
may or may not appear in the text itself. The monographs themselves stick,
by and large, to the documents and do not tend to be analytical.

Writing history, especially where it blends into current events, especially
where that current event is Vietnam, is a treacherous exercise. We could
not go into the minds of the decision-makers, we were not present at the
decisions, and we often could not tell whether something happened because
someone decided it, decided against it, or most likely because it unfolded
from the situation. History, to me, has been expressed by a passage from
Herman Melville's Moby Dick where he writes: "This is a world of chance,
' free will, and necessity -- all interweavingly working together as one;
chance by turn rules either and has the last featuring blow at events.”
Our studies have tried to reflect this thought; inevitably in the organizing
‘and writing process, they appear to assign more and less to men and free
will than was the case.

Encl - Outline of Studies ’ LESLIE H. GELB
Chairman, OSD Task Force

> _ ',° “UNCLASSIFIED
; aT & sfvaw s ‘os 1s WHEN SEPARATED FROM
By ENCLOSURE,
