Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-..US is fully appreciative difficulties which face French
Government in Indochina at this time and reminds him that Us
had already indicated its willingness, if French Government so
desired, to give public indication its approval of concrete
steps by French Government to come to grips with basic political
problem of Indochina. JI informed him that US also willing
under similar circumstances to consider assisting French Govern-
ment with respect to matter of financial aid for Indochina
through ECA but could not give consideration to altering its
present policy in this regard unless real progress made in
reaching non-Communist solution in Indochina based on coopera-
tion of true nationalists of that country." 67/

As negotiations proceeded with Bao Dai preliminary to the Elysee
Agreement, the Department of State instructed the American Ambassador
in Paris, on 17 January 1949, that:

“While the Department is desirous of the French coming to
terms with Bao Dai or any truly nationalist group which has a
reasonable chance of winning over the preponderance of Viet-
namese, we cannot at this time irretrievably commit the U.S.
to support of a native government which by failing to develop
appeal among Vietnamese might become virtually a puppet govern-
ment separated from the people and existing only by the presence
of French military forces." &/

Following the Elysee Agreement, the U.S. was better disposed toward
providing aid in Indochina. On 10 May 1949, the American Consul in
Saigon was informed that the U.S. desired the "Bao Dai experiment" to
succeed, since there appeared to be no other alternative.

"At the proper time and under the proper circumstances, the
Department will be prepared to do its part by extending recog-
nition to the Bao Dai government and by expressing the possibility
of complying with any request by such a government for U.S. arms
and economic assistance. It must be understood, however, that an
aid program of this nature would require Congressional approval.
Since the U.S. could, however, scarcely afford backing a govern-
ment which would have the color and be likely to suffer the fate
of a puppet regime, it must be clear that France will offer all
necessary concessions to make the Bao Dai solution attractive to
the nationalists. This is a step of which the French themselves
must see the urgency and necessity in view of the possibly short
time remaining before Communist successes in China are felt in
Indochina. Moreover, the Bao Dai government must through its
own efforts demonstrate the capacity to organize and conduct
affairs wisely so as to insure the maximum opportunity for ob-
taining requisite popular support, inasmuch as a government
created in Indochina analogous to the Kuomintang would be fore-
doomed to failure." 6/

A-48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
