Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. Dulles Deprecates Partition

This first official indication for public consumption of
U.S. refusal to join in a settlement contrary to our interests, was
coupled with a comment by Dulles on the possibility of partition. In
views that would change later, Dulles said he did not see how partition
could be arranged with the fighting not confined to any single area.
Although he did not actually rule out partition, he made it clear that
the U.S. would agree only to a division equivalent to a communist sur-
render, one that would place all the communist troops in a small re-
groupment area out of harm's way. But that arrangement "might not be
acceptable to them," he said coyly.

3. U.S. Makes Final Preparations for Geneva

&. French Inform U.5. of Opening Proposals

The test of U.S. policy came May 5 when the French informed
Washington of the proposals they intended to make in the first round of
talks. The proposals included a separation of the Vietnam situation of
“civil war" from the communist aggressions in Cambodia and Laos; a cease-
fire supervised by international euthority, to be followed by political
discussions aimed at free elections; the regrouping of regular forces
of the belligerents into defined zones upon signature of a cease-fire
agreement; the disarming of all irregular forces (i.e., the Viet Minh
guerrillas); and a guarantee of the agreements by "the States partici-
pating in the Geneva Conference."

b. JCS Study French Proposals

Once more, the Chiefs, in reviewing the proposals, fell
back on the Korean experience, which they said demonstrated the certainty
that the communists would violate any armistice controls, including those
supervised by an international body. An agreement to refrain from new
military activities during armistice negotiations would be a strong
obstacle to communist violations; but the communists, the JCS concluded,
would never agree to such an arrangement. The Chiefs therefore urged
that the U.S. not get trapped into backing a French armistice proposal
that then could be taken up by the communists and exploited to bind us
to a cease-fire. The only way to get satisfactory results was through
military suecess, and since the Navarre Plan was no longer tenable, the
next best alternative was not to associate the U.S. with any cease-fire
in advance of a satisfactory political settlement. The first step, the
Chiefs believed, should be the conclusion of a settlement that would
"reasonably assure the political and territorial integrity of the
Associated States..."3 only thereafter should a cease-fire be entertained. 9/

c. Eisenhower Suggests Possibility of United Action

As previously, the Joint Chiefs' position became U.S. policy,
in this case with only minor emendations. The President, reviewing the

A-9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
