Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

94. The JCS forward their views on negotiations with respect
to Indochina to the Secretary of Defense for transmittal
to the Department of State in regard to SECTO 106. The
JCS feel that, based on the Korean experience, and as a
minimum, the U.S, should not "associate itself with any
French proposal directed toward a cease-fire in advance
of a satisfactory political settlement." JCS Memorandum
to Secretary of Defense, 7 May 1954......scccescvccsescscese. 430

95. President Eisenhower makes it clear that the precondi-
tions for U.S. intervention in Indochina are that the
"U.S. would never intervene alone, that the indigenous
people must invite intervention, and that there must be
regional or collective action. The NSC action of the
meeting on 5 April as pertains to paragraph.1.b. of the
record (organizing a regional grouping) is approved by
the President. Memorandum by R. Cutler, Special Assis-
tant, for Secretary of Defense and CJCS and Meeting
Minibes,, 7) May 195 owas osiee aslec cle wine se wislelelelaiele palace cinisleielsieiele sie 435

9. May 8 - July 21: Geneva Conference on Indochina. The lst
Plenary Session convenes on 8 May and hears proposals by
France and the Viet Minh for cessation of hostilities and
participation in the conference. (Excerpts) The delegates
to the conference are from Great Britain and the USSR
(joint chairmen), France, the United States, Communist
China, Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, and the Viet Minh
regime. (Final agreements are signed on July 20 and 21,
and the main provisions concerning Vietnam are thet (1)
Vietnam is to be partitioned along the 17th parallel into
North and South Vietnam, (2) regulations are imposed on
foreign militery bases and personnel end on increased
armaments, (3) countrywide elections, leading to the
reunification of North and South Vietnam, are to be held
by July 20, 1956, and (4) an International Control Con-
mission (ICC) is to be established to supervise the im-
plementation of the agreements. The United States and
Vietnam are not signatories to the agreements. The
United States issues a unilateral declaration stating
that it (1) “will refrain from the threat or the use of
force to disturb" the Geneva agreements, (2) “would view
any renewal of the aggression in violation of the afore-
said agreements with grave concern and as seriously
threatening international peace and security," end (3)
"shall continue to seek to achieve wnity through free
elections, supervised by the UN to insure that they are
conducted fairiy.") Excerpts from lst Plenary Session

of the Geneva Conference, 8 May 195....ccecccncccccececceces 4139

xvi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
