Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But there are also times--and for me this is one of
them--when the mist of confusion lifts and the basic
principles emerge:

--that South Viet-Nam, however young and frail, has
the right to develop as a nation, free from the interference

of any other power, no matter how mighty or strong;

--that the normal processes of political action,
if given time and patience and freedom to work, will some-
day, some way create in South Viet-Nam a society that is
responsive to the people and consistent with their tradi-
tions.... 123/

The third point in the Unger scenario was to encourage
the GVN to establish contacts with the VC in order to promote defections
and/or to explore the possibilities of "negotiated arrangements." This
emphasis on contacts between the GVN and the VC may well have reflected
the flurry of highly public international activity to bring about negoti-
ations between the U.S. and the DRV that was taking place at that time
(considered in more detail below). In any event, this entire effort at
option-generation came to an inconclusive end around April 20.

The last paper to circulate was a much revised redraft
of Course B that reflected the aforementioned ideas about GVN/VC contacts.
It was, moreover, a recapitulation of ideas circulating in the spring
of 1966 at the second-level of the government. That they were considerably
out of touch with reality would shortly be revealed by the renewed I Corps-
Buddhist political problem in May. The paper began with a paragraph dis-
cussing the “Essential element" of the course of action -- i.e. "...our
decision now to press the GVN to expand and exploit its contacts with
the vc/NLF." 124/ The point of these contacts was to determine what
basis, if any, might exist for bringing the insurgency to an end.

The proposed approach to the GVN was to be made with three
considerations in mind. The first was the dual theme that U.S. assistance
in South Vietnam depended on a representative and effective GVN and the
_ genuine desire of the people for our help. Continued political turmoil

in South Vietnam would force us to state this policy with increasing
sharpness. The second Consideration was the U.S, military effort.
McNaughton specifically bifurcated this section in his revision to include
two alternatives, as follows:

(b) Continuation of the military program including U.S.
deployments and air sorties.

(1) Alternative A. Forces increased by the end of

107 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
