Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

f. Pressure on GVN to do better.

g. Major effort to rally the homefront.

M. D. T. 30/

While these papers were all being written outside the
Pentagon, the Clifford working roup under the direction of Assistant
Secretary Warnke had worked feverishly on several succeeding drafts of
a Memorandum for the President including various combinations of tabs
and supporting material. The intent of the group was to produce a memo
that made a specific recommendation on a course of action rather than
presenting a number of alternatives with their pros and cons. The process
required the reconciling of widely divergent views or the exclusion of
those that were incompatible with the thrust of the recommendation. With
respect to the war in the South the memo in its late-stage form on March 3
proposed a sweeping change in U.S. ground strategy based on a decision not
to substantially increase U.S. forces as General Westmoreland and the
Chiefs desired. In essence, the draft memo recommended the adoption of
a strategy of population protection along a "demographic frontier" in
South Vietnam and the abandonment of General Westmoreland's hitherto
sacrosanct large unit "search and destroy" operations. The portion of
the paper devoted to the air war recommended no escalation above current
levels. It specifically turned back proposals for reducing the Hanoi-
Haiphong restricted perimeters, closing Haiphong harbor, and bombing
population centers as all likely to be unproductive or worse. The section
in question argued as follows:

SIGNIFICANCE OF BOMBING CAMPATGN IN NORTH TO OUR
OBJECTIVES IN VIETNAM

The bombing of North Vietnam was undertaken to limit
and/or make more difficult the infiltration of men and
supplies in the South, to show them they would have to
pay a price for their continued aggression and to raise
the morale in South Vietnam. The last two purposes
obviously have been achieved.

It has become abundantly cleer that no level of
pombing can prevent the North Vietnamese from supplying
the necessary forces and materiel necessary to maintain
their military operations in the South. The recent Tet
offensive has shown that the bombing cannot even prevent
a Significant increase in these military operations, at
least on an intermittent basis.

The shrinking of the circles around Hanoi and
Haiphong will add to North Vietnam's costs and difficulty

*

168 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
