Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(ze TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(a) the plan for military intervention discussed
at this morning's meeting on the basis of the Vietnam task force
paper entitled 'Concept for Intervention in Vietnam’;

(b) an alternative plan for stationing in Vietnam
fewer U.S. combat forces than those called for under the plan
referred to in (a) above and with a more limited objective than
dealing with the Viet Cong; in other words, such a small force
would probably go in at Tourane /DaNang/ and possibly another
southern port principally for the purpose of establishing a U.S.
"presence' in Vietnam;

(c) other alternatives in lieu of putting any
U.S. combat forces in Vietnam, i.e. stepping up U.S. assistance
and training of Vietnam units, furnishing of more U.S. equipment,
particularly helicopters and other light aircraft, trucks and
other ground transport, etc.

3. During the two or three weeks that will be required
for the completion of General Taylor's mission, State will push
ahead with the following political actions:

(a) protest to the ICC on the step-up in North
Vietnamese support of Viet Cong activities,

(b) tabling at the UN a white paper based on
Mr. William Jordan's report concerning Communist violations of
the Geneva Accords, and

(c) consultation with our SEATO allies, princi-
pally the British and Australians, regarding SEATO actions in
support of the deteriorating situation in Vietnam.

That afternoon, the President announced the Taylor Mission, but he did
not make the hardly credible claim that he was sending his personal military
advisor to Vietnam to do an economic survey. He made a general announce-
ment, and was non-committal when asked whether Taylor was going to consider
the need for combat troops (there had been leaked stories in the newspapers
a few days earlier that the Administration was considering such a move.)
Nevertheless, the newspaper stories the next day flatly asserted that the
President had said Taylor was going to study the need for U.S. combat troops,
which was, of course, true, although not exactly what the President had

said. 10/
II. THE NEWSPAPERS AND THE CABLES

The day after Kennedy's announcement of the Taylor mission, Reuters
sent this dispatch from Saigon:

85, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
