Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive |

_E. Presidential Emphasis on "The Other War" and Press Reaction

At the end of 1965, with the bombing of the north in its tenth
month, and our ground forces growing steadily, the Administration was
making a determined effort to emphasize those American activities in
Vietnam which did not directly involve guns and fighting. This emphasis
on what came to be called the "Other War" reached a high point during
the conference at Honolulu in February of 1966. The emphasis on the
other war did not necessarily have to lead, as it did, to a re-emphasis
of pacification; that was a by-product, at least in part, of the renewed
support for pacification which had been coming from Ambassador Lodge, the
Marines, the CIA (with their cadre), and the advocates of organizational
reform (211 covered in previous sections). But the two themes merged at
Honolulu, and thus, out of the conference, came the first clear statement
of Presidential support to pacification.

The need of the Administration to emphasize and publicize the non-
military aspects of the war needs little amplification. Few documents
show this emphasis in the pre-Honolulu period, since it was so obvious.
In an exception, a joint State-USIA message dated October 4, 1965,
Washington told the Saigon Mission:

“There is continuine concern at the highest levels
here regarding need to emphasize our non-military programs
in Vietnam and give them maximum possible public exposure
both in U.S. and abroad. /Emphasis hades]

"We recognize that the Mission is fully cognizant of
this problem and already has underway measures to broaden
public knowledge and understanding of non-military activities...
We are also conscious of difficulties involved in enlisting
greater press interest in these developments when it finds
military actions more dramatic and newsworthy. Nevertheless,
we hope will continue to give non-military programs increasing
priority..." 4l/

It is useful to recall the situation which existed in February of 1966,
when the President went to Honolulu to meet with Ky and Thieu. On
January 30, 1966, the bombing of the North began again, after a 37-day
pause. There were 197,000 American servicemen in Vietnam by February 1.
The Washington Post -- which supported the Administration -- editorial-
ized on February 1:

"Tt is to be hoped that a new look is being taken at
the military tactics in the South so that greater emphasis
can be put on the safety of civilians, the rehabilitation
of the countryside, the furtherance of economic growth....
Efforts behind the lines at economic and social programs
must be increased." 45/

28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
