Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At State, Bundy drafted some comments on the OSD paper
which generally supported its analysis. With respect to the proposals
for mining Nortn Vietnamese waters, however, it made a significant
distinction:

-.-we would be inclined to separate the mining of
ports used by Soviet shipping from the mining of coastal
waters where (we believe) most of the shipping, if not all,
is North Vietnamese. Mining of the waterways would have
amore limited effect on Hanoi will and capacity, but would
also be much less disturbing to the Soviets and much less
likely to throw Hanoi into the arms of China, or to induce
the Soviets to cooperate more fully with the Chinese. 39/

The distinction is important because the President the next day did in
fact approve the limited mining of internal waterways but deferred any
decision on mining the ports. Beyond this, Bundy sought to reinforce
the undesirability of striking the sensitive dyke and levee system and
to emphasize that the Chinese buffer zone was a more important sanctuary
(from the point of view of likely Soviet and/or Chinese reactions) than
the Hanoi-Haiphong perimeters. o/

Several other memos of the same period appear in the files,
put it is-unlikely they had any influence on the new targets the President
was considering. Roger Fisher had sent McNaughton another of his
periodic notes on "future Strategy." After rehearsing the failures of
the bombing program he suggested that "...al11 northern bombing be restricted
+o @ narrower and narrower belt across the southern part of North Vietnam
until it merges into air support for an on-the-ground interdiction barrier." 41/
By thus concentrating and intensifying our interdiction efforts he hoped
we might finally be able to choke off the flow of men and goods to the
South.

A memo from the President's special military advisor,
General Maxwell Taylor, on February 20 considered some of the difficulties
of negotiations, in particular the sequence in which we should seek to
arrange a ceasefire and a political settlement. He argued that it was
‘in the U.S. interest to adopt a "fight and talk" strategy, in which the
political issues were settled first and the cease-fire arranged afterwards,
hopefully conducting the actual negotiations in secret while we continued
to vigorously press the VC/NVA in combat. 42/ The President passed the
memo on to the Secretaries of State and Defense and the Chairman of the
gJcs for their comment but since the question of negotiations was for the
moment academic it probably had no bearing on the next bombing decisions. 43/

2, A "Little" Escalation

The President approved only a limited number of the measures
presented to him, by and large those that would incur little risk of

13 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
