Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"The forces of France and the Associated States in Indochina have
for 8 years been engaged in a bitter struggle to prevent the engulfment
of Southeast Asia by the forces of international communism. The heroic
efforts and sacrifices of these French Union allies in assuring the
liberty of the new and independent states of Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam
has earned the admiration and support of the free world. In recognition
of the French Union effort the United States Government has in the past
furnished aid of various kinds to the Governments of France and the
Associated States to assist in bringing the long struggle to an early
and victorious conclusion.

"The French Government is firmly resolved to carry out in full its
declaration of July 3, 1953, by which is announced its intention of
perfecting the independence of the three Associated States in Indochina,
through negotiations with the Associated States.

"The Governments of France and the United States have now agreed
that, in support of plans of the French Government for the intensified
prosecution of the war against the Viet Minh, the United States will make
available to the French Government prior to December 31, 1954 additional
financial resources not to exceed $385 million. This aid is in addition
to funds already earmarked by the United States for aid to France and
the Associated States.

"The French Government is determined to make every effort to break
up and destroy the regular enemy forces in Indochina. Toward this end
the government intends to carry through, in close cooperation with the
Cambodian, Laotian, and Vietnamese Governments, the plans for increasing
the Associated States forces while increasing temporarily French forces
to levels considered necessary to assure the success of existing military
plans. The additional United States aid is designed to help make it
possible to achieve these objectives with maximum speed and effectiveness.

"The increased French effort in Indochina will not entail any basic
or permanent alteration of the French Government's plens and programs
for its NATO forces."

3. President Eisenhower's News Conference, February 10, 1954, Public
Papers of the Presidents, 1954, p. 253:
* * #

"Q. Daniel Shorr, CBS Radio: Mr. President, should your remarks on
Indochina be construed as meaning that you are determined not-to become
involved or, perhaps, more deeply involved in the war in Indochina, regard-
less of how that war may go?

"THE PRESIDENT. Well, I am not going to try to predict the drift of
world events now and the course of world events over the next months. I
say that I cannot conceive of a greater tragedy for America than to get
heavily involved now in en all-ont war in any of those regions, particularly
with large units.

B-5
