Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ike Be le THE INTERAGENCY DEBATE OVER U.S. INTERVENTION IN INDOCHINA

1. The General Policy Context

The debate over the wisdom and manner of American intervention
in Indochina was based primarily on the desirability of military involve-
ment, not on questions concerning Indochina’s value to United States
security interests in the Far East. The Eisenhower Administration was
in general agreement with the rationale for American interest in Indo-
china expressed by the Truman Administration. The United States Govern-
ment first came to full grips with the question of intervention in late
1953 -- early 1954 as the fall of Indochina seemed to become imminent.

a. The Final Truman Program (NSC_12})

NSC 12) (February, 1952) considered imperative the prevention
of a Communist take-over in Indochina. It recognized that even in the
absence of “identifiable aggression" by Communist China, the U.S. might
be forced to take some action in order to prevent the subversion of South-
east Asia. In case of overt Chinese intervention, NSC 124 recommended:

(1) naval, air and logistical support of French Union forces; (2) naval
blockade of Communist China; (3) attacks by land and carrier-based aircraft
on military targets in Mainland China. It stopped short of recommending
the commitment of U.S. ground forces in Indochina. 1/

b. Eisenhower Administration's "Basic National Security Policy"

NSC 162/2, adopted in October, 1953, ten months after the
Republican Administration took office, was the basic document of the
"New Look." After commenting on U.S. and Soviet defense capabilities,
the prospect of nuclear parity and the need to balance domestic economic
policy with military expenditures, it urged a military posture based on
the ability "to inflict massive retaliatory damage" on the enemy. Indo-
china was listed as an area of "strategic importance" to the U.S. An
attack on such important areas "probably would compel the United States
to react with military force either locally at the point of attack or
penerally against the military power of the aggressor." The use of
tactical nuclear weapons in conventional war situations was recommended,
but they were not specifically suggested for use in Indochina. 2/

2. The Question of Intervention with Ground Forces

a. The Problem is Presented

In late 1953, the Army questioned prevalent assumptions that
ground forces would not be required in Indochina if the area was as
important to U.S. security interests as the NSC papers stated. The Army
urged that the issue be faced squarely in order to provide the best
possible preparation for whatever courses of action might be undertaken.
The Plans Division of the Army General Staff pointed out that under current

B-5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
