Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Copies of the Thompson memorandum on the Delta were also forwarded to
Taylor at the latter's request. 45/ ‘Then in January 1962, Thompson, again
responding to Taylor's request, sent the latter a long letter outlining

his views. In less than a month, General Taylor could present to Presi-
dent Kennedy a plan entitled "A Strategic Concept for South Vietnam" by
Roger Hilsman which was an unabashed restatement of most of Thompson's
major points and toward which President Kennedy had, not incidentally,
already expressed a favorable disposition. 46

Hilsman's "strategic concept" avowedly flowed from three basic
principles: that the problem in Vietnam presented by the VC was political
rather thanmilitary in its essence; that an effective counterinsurgency
plan must provide the people and villages with protection and physical
security; and that counter guerrilla forces must adopt the same tactics
as those used by the guerrilla himself. )7/

To translate these principles into operational reality, Hilsman
ealled for "strategic villages" and "defended villages" 4 la Thompson,
with first priority to the most populous areas; i.e., the Delta and in the
vicinity of Hue. 48/ ARVN would, much as in Thompson's proposal, secure
the initial effort, when necessary, and be employed to keep the VC off
balance in those areas already under Viet Cong control. The plan envisaged
a three-phase process by which GVN control would progressively be expanded
from the least heavily VC-penetrated provinces with large populations
(phase I), into the more heavily penetrated population centers (phase II),
and finally into the areas along the Lactian and Cambodian borders (phase
III). 49/  Hilsman eschewed use of the "oil spot" analogy but the process
and rationale he put forth were the same. His plan moved "strategic vil-
lages" to a place of prominence greater than that in Thompson's Delta plan
and far in excess of the offhanded acceptance which had thus far been
afforded them by U.S. military advisors. Strategic hamlets were not the
heart of the Hilsman plan -- civic action was that -- but they were the symbcl,
the easily recognizable, easily grasped initial step by which GVN could be-
gin, following Hilsman's second principle, to "provide the people and the
villages with protection and physical security." 50/

C. The Advisors Reach Agreement

Thompson's basic ideas were gaining wide dissemination at the
highest level within the U.S. government in early 1962. What of his rela-
tions with the U.S. MAAG in Saigon? These had been significantly improved
as the result of a meeting between Thompson, Ambassador Nolting, and
British Ambassador Hohler. Thompson agreed to revise his paper so as to
remove the objection to his proposed command arrangements. Ambassador
Nolting reported that Thompson was now working "closely and amicably" with
MAAG. 51/ This took care of one of MeGarr's objections. Thompson had
apparently decided, too, to allow the issue to drop for the time being
of police primacy in pacification vis-a-vis ARVN. It was not, after all,
a change that could be made quickly; President Diem was convinced that
some start was needed to save his administration. That had been his rea-
son, after all, in reluctantly inviting increased American participation
in the war.

vs
TOP SECRET - S.usitive
