Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

against a complete Communist diplomatic triumph at Geneva, Eden was
equally convinced that the best way to assure continuation of the war
would be united action, and that the French, even after Dien Bien Phu,
were still strong enough to prevent the Communists from gaining all
Indochina.

Even before Dulles' April flight to London to sound out the
British on united action, the Churchill government was closely questioning
American evaluations of Indochina. In an April 1 cable, for instance,
Dulles vented his disturbance at Britain's refusal to accept the view that
the loss of Indochina would ultimately affect their security interests in
Malaya, Australia, and New Zealand. 29/ This was indeed the case, as
Dulles discovered for himself once he talked to Eden in London and later
at Geneva. Eden steadfastly refused to buy Dulles' analogy between Indo-
china and Malaya, retorting that the situation in Malaya was "well in
hand" while that in Indochina was clearly not. 30/ Admiral Redford
concluded in late April from talks with the British chiefs-of staff that
the U.K. policy seemed "to be on a very narrow basis strictly in terms
of local U.K. interest without regard to other areas of the Far East:
such as Japan." 31/ .

The British simply could not accept the domino principle
even as they admitted Southeast Asia's security value to the free world.
By the opening of the Geneva Conference, the U.S.-U.K. relations had
reached a low point: Dulles was insisting that the British were the
major roadblock to implementation of united action, while Eden was clinging
to the notion that a negotiated settlement leading to partition would be
the best outcome of an impossibly complex politico-military situation in
Indochina.

-f. French Oppose “United Action"

Secretary Dulles fared little better in selling "united
action" in Paris than he did in London, but for somewhat different reasons.
The French were seeking a quick action to avoid an imminent military defeat
at Dien Bien Phu. Dulles, however, refused to be torn from a collective
allied approach to the Indochina War. The French feared that a coalition
arrangement would lead to an internationalization of the war and take
control of it out of their hands. They, therefore, only desired local
assistance at Dien Bien Phu along the lines of Operation Vulture.

Furthermore, another objection to "united action” from the
French viewpoint was that it would only delay or impede the very negotia-
tions leading towards a settlement which the French increasingly desired.
The U.S. objective was to keep alive the French determination to continue
the war. Dulles feared that the French would use Geneva to find a face-
saving formula for a French surrender. Premier Laniel reaffirmed to Dulles
in Paris that his government would take no action which directly or
indirectly turned Indochina over to the Communists. But he also called
attention to the increasing desire on the part of many in France to get
out of Indochina at any cost. The French stressed that it was necessary

B-26 TOP SECRET -—- Sensitive
