Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

$510.00/4-146 : Telvrrim
The Consul at Saigon (Reet) to the Seeretary of State

CONTIDENTIAL : Saicox. April 1, 1946—10 a.m.
[Received April 2—10:30 p. mJ]
7), Assassination Dr. Phat, meniber Cochin China Couneil, on
March 29 by known Vietininh extremists and threats to kill members
opposed to Cochin China joming Vietnam has not helped Vietnam
cause. Tnereasing extrenist activities Saiwon and Cochin China also
bad effect and moderate Cochin Chinese not particularly pro-French
comment Vietminh trying to force joining Vietnam whether Coehin
Chinese desires or not. On other hand Frenel: seiziuve of Treasury
Hanoi precipitating general strike and incidents in Tonkin have not
helped French cause and inspires little confidence that they will keep
faith. One might hope that both sides take no steps during period of
negotiation which might jeopardize final peacenble outcome but every
likelihood stormy period ahead, particularly so far as concerns mature
status Cochin China. :
Reep:

8516.00 4-540
The Secretary of State ta the French Ambassador (Bonnet)®

*™ This note was reported by the Departinent in telegram 1655, April 12. 1946.
Sp. m., to Paris and repeated to Chungking and Saigon.

The Serretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency
the Freneh Ambassador and has the henor to refer to the Ambassa-
dor’s note no. 167 of March 7, 1946." enclosing a copy of the Franco-

* Not printed.
Chinese Agreement with reeard to the relief of Chinese forces in
northern Indo-China hy French forces and requesting the approval of
the Combined Chiets of Staff thereto, .

The Secretary of State is pleased to inform the Ambassador that
the Combined Chiefs of Stat have no abjection to the relief of Chinese
troons in northern French Indo-China by French forces, since they
consider that such arrangements ave a matter for determination by
the Governments of France and China. j

Since the Franco-Chinese avreement completes the reversion of all
Indo-China to French control. the Combined Chiefs of Staff consider
that the Frenel) military commander in Indo-China should act as a
medium for the French Government for coordination with the Su-
preme Commander for the Allied Powers on matters relating to the
repatriation of Japanese from Tido-China, and that the Chinese Su
premo Commander ™ and Adiniral Mountbatten should be relieved of

2 Generilissine Chianz Kaiesheék,
their duties and responsibilities for disarinament and eyactation of
Japanese in Indo-China,
