ty

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

since the cessation of hostilities of over $200 million worth of war
equipment, we have on the other hand reports of steady constant growth
of the warmaking potential of the Communists north of the 17th peralilel.

"Our reports reveal that in complete disregard of its obligations,
the Viet Minh have imported yoluminous quantities of arms across the
Sino-Viet Minh border and have imported a constant stream of Chinese
Communist military personnel to work on railroads, to rebuild roads, to
establish airports, and to work on other projects contributing to the
growth of the military potential of the zone under Communist occupation.

"As so eloquently stated by the British Government in a diplomatic
note released to the press and sent to Moscow in April of this year,
and I quote:

‘The Viet Minh army has been so greatly strengthened by the
embodiment and re-equipment of irregular forces that instead of the 7
Viet Minh divisions in existence in July 1954 there are now no less than

20. This striking contrast between massive military expansion in the aS

North end the withdrawal and reduction of military forces in the South
speaks for itself.’

"By lies, propaganda, force, and deceit, the Communists in Hanoi
would undermine Free Viet-Nam, whose fall they have been unable to secure
by their maneuverings on the diplomatic front. These people, whose crimes
against suffering humanity are so vividly described in the book by It.
Dooley who addressed you this morning, have sold their country to Peiping.
They have shamelessly followed all the devious zigzags of the Communist-
bloc line so that their alliance with Communist China and the Soviet Union
is firmly consolidated. These are the people who are now inviting Presi-
dent Diem to join them in a coalition government to be set up through
so-called ‘free elections.'

"President Diem and the Government of Free Viet-Nam reaffirmed on
April 6 of this year and on other occasions their desire to seek the re-
unification of Viet-Nam by peaceful means. In this goal, we support them
fully. We hope and pray that the partition of Viet-Nam, imposed against
the will of the Vietnamese people, will speedily come to an end. For our
part we believe in free elections, and we support President Diem fully in
his position that if elections are to be held, there first must be condi-
tions which preclude intimidation or coercion of the electorate. Unless
such conditions exist there can be no free choice.

"May those leaders of the north in whom the spirit of true patriotism
still survives realize the futility of the Communist efforts to subvert
Free Viet-Nam by force or guile. May they force the abandonment of these
efforts and bring ebout the peaceful demobilization of the large standing
armies of the Viet Minh. May they, above all, return to'the just cause of
all those who want to reunify their country in peace and independence and
for the good of a11 the people of Viet-Nam.”

B-31
