Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

destitute refugees from North Vietnam; and he did all of this despite
active French opposition and vacillating American support. Under his
leadership South Vietnam became well established as a sovereign state,
by 1955 recognized de jure by 36 other nations. Moreover, by mid-1955
Diem secured the strong backing of the U.S. He conducted a plebiscite
in late 1955, in which an overwhelming vote was recorded for him in
preference to Bao Dai; during 1956, he installed a government --
representative in form, at least --, drafted a new constitution, and
extended GVN control to regions that had been under sect or Viet Minh
rule for a decade; and he pledged to initiate extensive reforms in
land holding, public health, and education. With American help, he
established a truly national, modern army, and formed rural security
forces to police the countryside. In accomplishing all the foregoing,
he confounded those Vietnamese of North and South, and those French,
who had looked for his imminent downfall.

While it is true that his reforms entailed oppressive Measures -~
e.g., his "political reeducation centers" were in fact little more than
concentration camps for potential foes of the government -- his regime
compared favorably with other Asian governments of the same period in
its respect for the person and property of citizens. There is much
that can be offered in mitigation of Diem's authoritarianism. He began
as the most singularly disadvantaged head of state of his era. His
political legacy was endemic violence and virulent anti-colonialisn.

He took office at a time when the government of Vietnam controlled only
a few blocks of downtown Saigon; the rest of the capital was the feudal
fief of the Binh Xuyen gangster fraternity. Beyond the environs of
Saigon, South Vietnam lay divided among the Viet Minh enclaves and the
theocratic dominions of the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao sects. All these
powers would have opposed any Saigon government, whatever its composi-
tion; in fact, their existence accounts for much of the confidence the
DRV then exhibited toward the outcome of the Geneva Settlement. For
Diem to have erected any central government in South Vietnam without
reckoning resolutely with their several armed forces and clandestine
organizations would have been impossible: they were the very stuff of
South Vietnam's politics.

Diem's initial political tests reinforced his propensity to
inflexibility. The lessons of his first 10 months of rule must have
underscored to Diem the value of swift, tough action against dissent,
and of demanding absolute personal loyalty of top officials. Also,
by May 1955, Ngo Dinh Diem had demonstrated to his satisfaction that
the U.S. was sufficiently committed to South Vietnam that he could afford
on occasion tc resist American pressure, and even to ignore American
advice. Diem knew, as surely as did the United States, that he himself
represented the only alternative to a communist South Vietnam.

Diem was handicapped in all his attempts to build a nation by his
political concepts. He saw himself as a moral reformer; he talked affairs

ES TOP SECRET - Sensitive
