Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

¢-0-P-¥

SECRET HANOI, undated.
[Received February 27 - 11:45 a.m./

From Landon for Moffat and Culbertson.

1. Sainteny stated that in conversation with Ho Chi Minh he offered
Annamese complete independence within French community: That this meant
that Annamese would have benefit of French advisers in every department of
Government: That for instance Annamese Foreign Office would express its
policies through French channels: That Annamese Army and War Ministry would
be coordinated with French Army and War Ministry: And that Annamese if
[int] Finance and Commerce Ministries would heed French advisers as Annamese
were inexpert in these matters and might jeopardize [apparent garble/ French
investment. Sainteny said that Annamese in Cochin China would probably pre-
fer to remain French Colony rather come under northern Annamese Government.
In this connection Ho Chi Minh said that French officials had conferred with
him but that they were vague in their comments and had avoided the real
issues of Annamese independence so that he had asked them to get specific
terms from Paris which would make clear whether the French really offered
Annamese independence or were merely using new language to describe usual
French control Annamese affairs.

2. Ho Chi Minh handed me two letters addressed to President of USA,
China, Russia, and Britain, identical copies of which were stated to have
been forwarded to other governments named. In two letters Ho Chi Minh re-
quests USA as one of United Nations to support idea of Annamese independence
according to Philippines example, to examine the case of the Annamese, and
to take steps necessary to maintenance of world peace which is being endangered
by French efforts to reconquer Indochina. He asserts that Annamese will
fight until United Nations interfere in support of Annamese independence.
The petition addressed to major United Nations contains:

a. Review of French relations with Japanese where French Indochina
allegedly aided Japs: ¥

b. Statement of establishment on 2 September 1945 of peaisetenst
Government of?/ Democratic Republic of Viet Minh:

ce. Summary of French conquest of Cochin China begun 23 Sept 1945
and still incomplete:

d. Outline of accomplishments of Annamese Government in Tonkin
including popular elections, abolition of undesirable taxes, expansion of
education and resumption as far as possible of normal economic activities:

e. Request to four powers: (1) to intervene and stop the war in
Indochina in order to mediate fair settlement and (2) to bring the Indochinese
issue before the United Nations Organization. The petition ends with state-
ment that Annamese ask for full independence in fact and that in interim while
awaiting UNO decision the Annamese will continue to fight the reestablishment
of French imperialism. Letters and petition will be transmitted to Department
soonest.

tanpon]

c-101 C-O-P-¥
