Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

",..We understand General Westmoreland plans use of limited
number U.S, forces in buddy system principle to guide and moti-
vate ARVN in RD/P. However, we have serious doubts sbout any
further involvement U.S. troops beyond that in straight pacifica-
tion operations. We fear this would tempt Vietnamese to leave
this work more and more to us and we believe pacification, with
its intimate contact with population, more appropriate for Viet-
namese forces, who must after all as arm of GVN establish con-

‘ structive relations with population. Hence we believe there
should be no thought of U.S. taking substantial share of paci-
fication. The urgent need is to begin effectively pressing
ARVN." 56/

In Saigon, the Mission moved slowly. Three days later, with still no
answer from Saigon, the State Department sent out the following very short
and curt cable:

"Personal for Lodge and Porter from the Secretary
"Ref State 83699

"REFTRL was discussed today at highest levels, who wished to
emphasize that this represents final and considered decision
and who expressed hope that indicated measures could be put
into effect just as rapidly as possible.” 57/

This produced, at last, two long answers from Lodge and Porter, which laid
out what the new structure was going to look like, and added some personal
comments from Lodge:

"FOR THE SECRETARY, SECDEF AND KOMER
"NODIS

"1, This is in reply to your 83699 as amended by your 85196
concerning which General Weetmoretand, Porter and I have had
extensive consultation.

"2. We will, of course, carry out your instructions just as
rapidly as possible, and our planning is already far advanced.

"3, It is very gratifying that you feel as we do on the
urgent need to revamp the ARVI], on the importance of putting all
civilians in the field under Porter and of having single civilian
responsibility in province and corps -~ measures which we have
long advocated. Doubt whether we can change over night habits
and organization of ARVN acquired during the last ten years.
Unless our success against main force daytime activity is
equalled by success ageinst guerrillas during the night, swift
improvement cannot be expected to result simply by reorganiza-
tion on the U.S. civilian side. It is our ability to infuse

li2
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
