Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“TOP SECRET - Sensitive

McNeamara's concluding paragraph spoke of "an acceptable
outcome." Previously in his paper he had listed "nine fundamental
elements" of a favorable outcome. These were:

(a) VC stop attacks and drastically reduce inci-
dents of terror and sabotage.

(ob) DRV reduces infiltration to a trickle, with
some reasonably reliable method of our obtaining con-
firmation of this fact.

(c) US/GVN stop bombing of North Vietnam.

(a) GVN stays independent (hopefully pro-US, but
possibly genuinely neutral).

(e) GVN exercises governmental functions over sub-
stantially all of South Vietnam.

(f) Communists remain quiescent in Laos and Thailand.

(g) DRV withdraws PAVN forces and other North Viet-
namese infiltrators (not regroupees) from South Vietnam.

(nh) VC/NLF transform from a military to a purely
political organization.

(i) US combat forces (not advisors or AID) withdraw.

These "fundamental elements," McNamara said, could evolve with
or without express agreement and, indeed, except for what might be nego-
tiated incidental to a cease-fire they were more likely to evolve without
an explicit agreement than with one. So far as the difference between a
"eevorable"” and an "acceptable" outcome was concerned, he continued,
there was no need for the present to address the question of whether the
United States should "ultimately settle for something less than the nine
fundamentals,” because the force deployments recommended in the memoran-
dum would be prerequisite to the achievement of any acceptable settle-

"g decision can be made later, when bargaining becomes a reality,

ment 3 x 7 * "
whether to compromise in any particular.

In summary, then, McNamara's program consisted of first sub-
stantially increasing the pressure on the enemy by every means short of
those, such as the bombing of population centers in the North, that would
run sizeable risks of precipitating Soviet or Chinese direct intervention
in the war, and then seeking a de facto political settlement essentially

on US/GVN terms.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
14 ;
