Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ty Ns U.S. POLICY, 1940-1950

1. Indochina in U.S. Wartime Policy, 1941-1945

In the interval between the fall of France in 1940, and the Pearl
Harbor attack in December, 1941, the United States watched with increasing
apprehension the flux of Japanese military power into Indochina. At first
the United States urged Vichy to refuse Japanese requests for authoriza-
tion to use bases there, but was unable to offer more than vague assur-
ances of assistance, such as @ State Department statement to the French
Ambassador on 6 August 1940 that:

"We have been.doing and are doing everything possible within
the framework of our established policies to keep the situation
in the Far East stabilized; that we have been progressively
taking various steps, the effect of which has been to exert
economic pressure on Japan; that our Fleet is now based on Hawaii,
and that the course which we have been following, as indicated
above, gives a clear indication of our intentions and activities
for the future." *

The French Ambassador replied that:

"In his opinion the phrase ‘within the framework of our
established policies,' when associated with the apparent reluc-
tance of the American Government to consider the use of mili-
tary force in the Far East at this particular time, to mean
that the United States would not use military or naval force
in support of any position which might be taken to resist the
Japanese attempted aggression on Indochina. The Ambassador
reared] that the French Government would, under the indicated
pressure of the Japanese Government, be forced to accede..." *

The fears of the French Ambassador were realized. In 19}1, however, Japan

went beyond the use of bases to demands for a presence in Indochina tanta-

mount to occupation. President Roosevelt himself expressed the heightening
U.S. alarm to the Japanese Ambassador, in a conversation recorded by Acting
Secretary of State Welles as follows:

“The President then went on to say that this new move by
Japan in Indochina created an exceedingly serious problem for
the United States...the cost of any military occupation is

tremendous and the occupation itself is not conducive to the

¥U.5. Departnent of State Memorandum from J.C, Dunn to Under §
of State Welles, 6 August 190, ecretary

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
A-10
