Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

JAPAN
= :
an organization similar to that of corresponding American units In the
Par Hast.

Tt is therefore requested, in rezard to civisions as well as to su:
porting army corps units and sorvices, that the types of units to Se
organized, be exactly defined.

Tt is finally sugeested, in order to iacilitate further negotiations, that
Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force, be nuthorized t
doal directly with the French command in what concerns details of the
matters herewith referred to.

A. M. Brossin pu Sarse Dipren

[Enclosure Bj
TOP SECRET
Drarr

MEMORANDUM For tum Cuter or rus Pruncit Mirirany Misstox
To THE Unite Srares

1. With reference to your memorandum of 29 Miay 194 ¢
to the Chie? of Stal, U.S. Army, the United Ststes fs of Stat

accept in principle that portion of your propose! whereby the French
Government puts at.the entire disposal of the American commend s
French army corps of two infantry divisions, with corps-supp 2
and service units on the U.S. seale, for operations in the war sgains:
Japan. This accepiance in principle is with the understanding that

the egreement on this matter with the French Government will include

the following provisions:— |

3 ‘
@. This French corps will be, both during the pe of hostilities
and in the post-hostilities readjustment period until released by the
United States, subject to the complete command and control of the
United States command in the same manner as a U.S. army corps.

6. Movement oi the corps from France will be contingent upon the
Trench corps having, in the opinion of the United States command, a
combat eficiency based on United States standards.

¢, Assurance that adequate trained replacements will be provided by
the French Government as nocossary.

d. Meximum uso will be made of ecuipmont provided under the
North African and Metropolitan Resrmament Programs.
e. The implementation of i} ; 1 tiers such es
accompanying supporting and sorvice units, provisions for equipmeni,
and the planning and timing for the movement and employment of tha
corps will be in accordance wits plans end arrangements to be déter-
mined by the United States military authorities who will deal directly
with the French military authorities. ;

SiEnclosure A, supre.
[No 1283

Jo
