Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"All men are created equal; they are endowed by their Creator
with certain unalienable Rights; among these are Life, Liberty,
and the pursuit of Happiness.

"This immortal statement was made in the Declaration of
Independence of the United States of America in 1776. In a broader
sense, this means: All the peoples on the earth are equal from
birth, all the peoples have a right to live, to be happy and free.

"The Declaration of the French Revolution made in 1791 on
the Rights of Man and the Citizen also states: 'All men are
born free and with equal rights, and must always remain free and
have equal rights.'

"Those are undeniable truths.

"Nevertheless, for more than eighty years, the French imperi-
alists, abusing the standard of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity,
have violated our Fatherland and oppressed our fellow citizens.
They have acted contrary to the ideals of humanity and justice.

"In the field of politics, they have deprived our people of
every democratic liberty.

"They have enforced inhuman laws; they have set up three
distinct political regimes in the North, the Center, and the
South of Viet-Nam in order to wreck our national unity and pre-
vent our people from being united.

"They have built more prisons than schools. They have
mercilessly slain our patriots; they have drowned our uprisings
in rivers of blood.

"They have fettered public opinion; they have practiced
obscurantism against our people.

"To weaken our race they have forced us to use Opium and
alcohol.

"In the field of economics, they have fleeced us to the
backbone, impoverished our people and devastated our land.

"They have robbed us of our rice fields, our mines, our
forests, and our raw materials. They have monopolized the issu-
ing of bank notes and the export trade.

"They have invented numerous unjustifiable taxes and reduced

our people, especially our peasantry, to a state of extreme
poverty.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-34
