Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

Hanoi needed and wanted only Chinese aid to this end and wished to be its
own master. And we knew, as again we always have, that North Viet-Nam
would resist any Communist Chinese trespassing on areas it controlled.

But these two propositions were not then, as they are not now, inconsistent
with the belief that the aggressive ambitions of Communist China and

North Viet-Nam--largely North Vietnamese in old Indochina, overlapping

in Thailand, Chinese in the rest of Southeast Asia--would surely feed on
each other. In the eyes of the rest of Southeast Asia, certainly, they
were part of a common and parallel threat.

"So, in effect, the policy of 1954-61 was reaffirmed in the early
months of 1961 by the Kennedy administration. Let me say right here I
do not mean to make this a personal analysis of President Kennedy nor to
imply any view whatever as to what he might or might not have done had he
lived beyond November of 1963. But some untrue things have been said
about the 1961 period, and I believe the record totally supports the
account of policy, and the reasons for it, that I have given.

"STEMMING THE NORTH VIETNAMESE THREAT

"We then come to the eighth period of decision--the fall of 1961.
By then, the ‘guerrilla aggression' (Hilsman's phrase) had assumed truly
serious proportions, and morale in South Viet-Nam had been shaken. It
seemed highly doubtful that without major additional United States actions
the North Vietnamese threat could be stemmed. ;

"President Kennedy took the decision to raise the ante, through a
system of advisers, pilots, and supporting military personnel that rose
gradually to the level of 25,000 in the next 3 years.

"T do not think it is appropriate for me to go into the detail of
the discussions that accompanied this decision. Fairly full, but still
incomplete, accounts have been given in various of the books on the
period. What can be seen, without going into such detail, is that the
course Of action that was chosen considered and rejected, at least for
the time being, the direct introduction of ground combat troops or the
bombing. of North Viet-Nam, although there was no doubt even then--as
Hilsman again makes clear--that the bombing of North Viet-Nam could have
been sustained under any reasonable legal view in the face of what North
Viet-Nam was doing. Rather, the course of action which was adopted
rightly stressed that the South Vietnamese role must remain crucial and
primary.

"In effect, it was decided that the United States would take those
additional actions that appeared clearly required to meet the situation,
not knowing for sure whether these actions would in fact prove to be
adequate, trying--despite the obvious end always recognized effect of
momentum and inertia--not to cross the bridge of still further action,
and hoping strongly that what was being undertaken would prove sufficient.

D-116°
