Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would say that we have very little influence on what is
essentially a Vietnamese effair. In addition, this would
place the heads of the Generals, their civilian supporters,
and lower military officers on the spot, thereby sacrific-
ing @ significant portion of the civilian and military
leadership needed to carry the war against the VC to its
successful conclusion. After our efforts not to discourage
@ coup and this change of heart, we would foreclose any
possibility of change of the GVN for the better.

ee ee

As regards your paragraph 10 (question of determination
énd force of character of coup leaders), I do not know what
more proof can be offered than the fact these men are ob-
viously prepared to risk their lives and that they want noth-
ing for themselves. If I am any judge of human nature, Don's
face expressed Sincerity and determination on the morning
that I spoke to him. Heartily agree thet a miscalculation
could jeopardize position in Southeast Asia. We also run
tremendous risks by doing nothing. 63/

Whether Lodge seriously believed this or merely used it as an argumenta-
tive excuse for not entertaining the possibility of intervention to delay
or stop an unviable attempt is not clear. His defense of the plotters
and his support for their goal in this telegraphic dialogue with Washing-
ton, however, clearly show his emotional bias in favor of a coup. ZHlse-
where in the cable Loige objected to the designation of Harkins as the
Chief of Mission in the event of a coup during his absence.

The tone and content of these parallel messages from Harkins and
Lodge only heightened White House anxiety and, no doubt, raised concern
about the objectivity of these two principal U.S. observers of the criti-
cal Vietnamese situation. In an effort to clear the air, explicitly re-
define and restate the policy guidance, and clarify the assignment of
roles and responsibilities within the Mission, the White House sent still
another cable to Saigon later on October 30. 64/ Teking pointed issue
with Lodge's view, the message stated: irk

We do not accept as a basis for US policy that we have no
power to delay or discourage a coup. In your paragraph 12
you say that if you were convinced that the coup was going to
fail you would of course do everything you could to persuade
coup leaders to stop or delay any operation which, in your
best judgement, does not clearly give high prospect of success.
We have never considered any betrayal of generals to Diem, and
our 79109 explicitly rejected that course. We recognize the
danger of appearing hostile to generals, but we believe that our
own position should be on as firm ground as possible, hence we
camiot limit ourselves to proposition implied in your message

hig TOP SECRET - Sensitive
