Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive

"Operation Dang Tien"(Let's go) in Binh Dinh Province with a goal of 328
strategic hamlets in its first year; and "Operation Phuong Hoang" (Royal
Phoenix) in Quang Nai Province with a goal of 125 strategic hamlets by
the end of 1962,

D. At Last -- A National Plan

The GVN drew all of the partialistic programs together in its
August 1962 national priority plan, mentioned earlier. The nation was
divided into four priority zones (Map 3). First priority was assigned
to the eleven provinces around Saigon. This ineluded essentially the
area of the Thompson Delta plan plus the original area of "Operation
Sunrise” plus Gia Dinh Province (Map 4). Priorities within each zone
were further specified. Within the zone of first national priority, for
example, the provinces of Vinh Long, Long An, and Phuoc Try were assigned
the highest priority; Binh Duong -- where operations were already in
progress -- was given priority three (Map 5). By the end of the summer
of 1962 GVN claimed that 3,225 of the planned 11,316 hamlets had already
been completed and that over 33 percent of the nation’s total population
was already living in completed hamlets (See Table 1).

October 1962, when Diem made the Strategic Hamlet Program the
avowed focus of his counterinsurgent campaign, marks the second watershed
in the development and implementation of the program. The first such
watershed had been the consensus, on the potential value of such a pro-~
gram, which had been developed at the end of 1961 and early 1962. There
would be no others until the program died with Diem.

E. Effect on U.S. Perceptions

The effect of the GVN's concentraion on strategic hamlets was to
make U.S. assessments focus on several sub-aspects of the problem. Atten-
tion tended to be directed toward how well hamlets were being fortified and
whether or not the implementation phase was well managed; i.e., whether
peasants were paid for their labor, reimbursed for their losses, and given
adequate opportunity to attend their crops. Conversely, attention was
directed away from the difficult-to-assess question of whether the follow-
up actions to hamlet security were taking place -- the actions which would
convert the peasantry from apathy (if not opposition) to identification
with their central government.

This focusing on details which diverted attention from the ultimate
objective took the form of reports, primarily statistical, which set forth
‘the construction rate for strategic hamlets, the incident rate of VC
activities, and the geographical areas in which GVN control was and was not
in the ascendancy. These "specifics" were coupled to generalized assess-
ments which almost invariably pointed to shortcomings in GVN's execution
of the program. The shortcomings, however, were treated as problems in
efficient management and operational organization; the ineluctability of
increased control (or security) leading somehow to popular identification

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

eh
