Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

follows: (1) "deploy to Thailand, South Vietnam, Laos and elsewhere the
forces, sea, air and land, required to counter a North Vietnamese or

Chicom response of the largest likely order"; (2) "initiate overt air
reconnaissance activities as a means of dramatizing North Vietnamese in-
volvement"; beginning with high-level flights and following with low-level
missions; (3) "take limited air or ground action in Cambodia and Laos,
including hot pursuit across the Cambodian border end limited operations
across the Laos border"; (4) "blockade Haiphong," which would "have drama-
tic political effect because it is a recognized military action that hits

at the sovereignty of North Vietnam and suggests strongly that we may

plan to go further"; (5) “establish a limited air defense capability

around Saigon"; and (6) conduct air strikes on key North Vietnamese LOC's,
infiltrator training camps, key industrial complexes, and POL storage.

It is important to note that the order of commitment perceived in early
1964 was considerably different from the order which most observers would
assign to such actions at the time of this writing. The ground force
deployments (Item 1) were primarily deterrent deployments to Thailand, on
the model of those made during the 1961-62 Laotian crisis. Blockading

(Item 4) was considered a low-commitment, low-risk action through most of
1964. Significantly, the last set of actions "in any number" was cited as
implying "a U.S. commitment to go all the way if necessary." Thus, the group
cautioned that before embarking on such steps the Administration should con-
sider how far it would be willing to go in the event of possible reactions.
For example, how long would we persist "in defiance of international pres-
sures for a cease-fire and conference"? Or, how far would we go, either
within the proposed concept or by escalating beyond it, in continuing mili-
tary pressures if the DRV did not comply -- or if it decided to escalate? 28/

Although warning of the need to be prepared "to follow through
against Communist China if necessary," the study group estimated that
neither China nor the Soviet Union would intervene militarily, other than
to supply equipment. In view of these estimates and the study group's
basic assumption of DRV sensitivity to industrial losses, its assessments
of the likely outcomes of the. actions it discussed are significant. Assert-
ing that pressures against North Vietnam were "no substitute for successful
counterinsurgency in South Vietnam," the group listed the probable positive
gains: (1) U.S. action could demonstrate U.S. power and determination, along
with restraint, to Asia and the world at large; (2) U.S. action would lead
to some reduction in Viet Cong morale; and (3) U.S. action if carefully
planned and executed might improve our negotiating position over whet it
would otherwise be. (The group saw negotiation as "virtually inevitable.")
However, it then countered with the following judgment:

"It is not likely that North Vietnam would (if it could) call
off the war in the South even though U.S. actions would in time
have serious economic and political impact. Overt action against
North Vietnam would be unlikely to produce reduction in Viet Cong
activity sufficiently to make victory on the ground possible in
South Vietnam unless accompanied by new U.S, bolstering actions
in South Vietnam and considerable improvement in the government
there. The most to be expected would be reduction of North Viet-
nemese support of the Viet Cong for a while and, thus, the gaining
of some time and opportunity by the government of South Vietnam to
improve itself." 29/ .

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

cy
