Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

should make a very carefully written and persuasive announce-
ment which would be done on film for use on television and in
the movie theaters. The Vietnamese are great movie-goers and
it is a very important medium here. I said that he should not
read it on film with his head bobbing up and down as he Looked
down at the text, but should have it put on cue card along side
the camera and read it as he looks right into the lens.

6. His statement should be written in such a way as not to
exclude the possibility of elections later on for a constitu-
tional convention. In other words, this should be deliberately
fuzzed and left open by implication. I said I much preferred
the phrase "constitutional convention" to the pernicious French
phrase "constituent assembly." The constitutional convention
would meet, adopt the constitution and disband, whereas the
constituent assembly stays around and makes trouble for an
indefinite period.

7. He agreed with all this and seemed to understand it.
He said that last night, the Generals had unanimously confirmed
the names of the members of the preparatory committee. He would
announce all this as I suggested. I wish he would do it quickly.

8. I suggested that impulsive unprepared statements were
most dangerous at this time. JWxperienced politicians often
make statements which seem to be "off the cuff," but actually
are carefully thought out. His unprepared statements always
worry me.

9. He agreed with me that certain Buddhists were unwittingly
taking Communist inspired advice, as were the students in Hue
who had attacked me...

10. He was absolutely sure that the Buddhists were divided
among themselves -- an analysis which I share. He agrees with
me that Tri Quang simply has not got the powerful psychological
factors working for him now that he hed in October '63. All
the Commuist Propaganda in the world cannot alter these facts:
That in '63, the Buddhists were discriminated against, and now
they are not; that in the latter days of '63 the Buddhists were
persecuted whereas now they are not; and that Tri Quang was an
underdog then, and now he is not. Yet Tri Quang is evidently
determined.

ll. My advice to him was not very drastic and quite simple
to do, and yet I believe that if he follows it conscientiously
and expeditiously without procrastination that there may be
enough of a budding sense of National interest to start moving
things along in the right direction,

J 13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
