Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

Throughout this period we have sought certain fundamental
objectives:

A. To preserve the Vij nation, and thus, the present
govermment.

B. To provide for an orderly political evolution from
military to civil government.

C. Yo preserve the Armed Forces as an effective shield
against VC.

D. To guard and expand all our political, economic, social
and military gains, notably those which flowed from the
Honolulu declaration.

EH. To maintain the effectiveness of the Free World forces
in Vij. 13/ :

On April 12, GVN found a face-saving formula and withdrew its Ranger
battalions from Da Nang to Saigon, and the streets became relatively quiet.
On the lth, the Directorate gave wey to the demands for elected civilian
government by promising elections for a Constituent Assembly within three
to five months. For the time being the suddhists and other political
groups, while making additional demands, called off the demonstrations on
condition that Ky honor his promises. 1}/

On April 23, Lodge reviewed for State all the leverage available that
might be used to help bring the I Corps area under government authority,
and rejected using any of it.

We have considered possibility of using U.S. control over
economic and military commodities in I Corps to foster
re-establishment of government authority in the areas.

The bulk of USAID-controlled commodities are scheduled
for use in rural areas. Comperatively little anti-
government activity is carried on by the rural popula-
tion...

The Hue-Deliang area currently is relatively well stocked

with basic commodities. There is an estimated four month
supply .of rice on hand and the countryside is now start-

ing the harvesting of a rice crop...

The U.S. currently controls, through the USAID, the follow-
ing; (A) Warehouses in the part of Daliang containing
quantities of construction material and PL-480 foodstuffs
.--(B) Three deep draft vessels and one coastal vessel now

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
