Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The necessity for this type of air campaign is created
by constreints imposed, for other than military reasons,
upon the conduct of the war in NVN. These constraints
result in maximizing exposure of larger numbers of aircraft
for longer periods against increasingly well defended targets
of limited comparative values./sic/ The measure of the
effectiveness of the interdiction effort is the infiltration
and its consequence which would be taking place if the air
campaign were not being conducted. The cost to the enemy
is not solely to be measured in terms of loss of trucks but
in terms of lost capability to pursue his military objectives
in SVN. Similarly, the cost to the US must consider that
damage which the enemy would be capable of inflicting by
infiltrating men and supplies now inhibited by the inter-
diction effort; this includes increased casualties in RVN
for which a dollar cost is not applicable. 81/

Sensing that the thrust of the OSD analysis was to make a case for the
barrier at the expense of the bombing, the Chiefs at last came down hard
against any diversion of resources to barrier construction. In no uncer-
tain terms they stated:

The Joint Chiefs of Staff agree that improved inter-
diction strategy is needed, but such improvement would not
necessarily include the barrier operation. As mentioned above
and as recommended previously, an effective air campaign
against NVN should include closing the ports, destruction of
high value military targets, attack of their air defense
systems and airfields and the other fixed targets on the
target list that have not been struck. These improvements
have thus far been denied.

Preliminary information developed by Task Force 728 indi-
cates that the forces and cost for the barrier will be sub-
stantial. The concept and equipment for the barrier have
not- been subjected to a cost analysis study. Its effectiveness
is open to serious question and its cost could well exceed
the figure of $1.1 billion given for. projected aircraft losses

in this issue paper. 82/

Ac already indicated, these issues were all decided upon
by the President immediately after the election. On November 11, McNamara
sent the Chiefs a memo with the authorized levels for Program #4.  CINCPAC's
proposed increases in sortie levels were rejected and the McNamara recom-
mendation of October 14 for their stabilization was adopted. 83/ Asa
reason for rejecting expansion of the air war, the Secretary simply stated
that such would not be possible since no additional tactical fighter
squadrons hed been approved. The one upward adjustment of the air war

Le TOP SECRET - Sensitive
