Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

"T have another secret intelligence report here. This one tells what
another Communist officer in the Far East told his men several months
before the invasion of Korea. Here is what he said: ‘In order to success-
fully undertake the long-awaited world resolution, we must first unify
Asia...Java, Indochina, Malaya, India, Tibet, Thailand, Philippines, and
Japan are our ultimate targets....The United States is the only obstacle
on our road for the liberation of all the countries in southeast Asia. In
other words, we must unify the people of Asia and crush the United States.'

SE =e

"The dangers are great. Make no mistake about it. Behind the North
Koreans and Chinese Communists in the front lines stand additional millions
of Chinese soldiers. And behind the Chinese stand the tanks, the planes,
the submarines, the soldiers, and the scheming rulers of the Soviet Union.”

* kK %*

3. President Truman's Special Message to Congress on Mutual Security
Program, May 24, 1951, Public Papers of the Presidents, p. 309:

* 3 te

"In Asia, in a vast area stretching from Afghanistan to Korea, free
countries are struggling to meet communist aggression in all its many
forms. Some of these countries are battling the communist armies of
Soviet satellites; some are engaged in bitter civil strife against
communist-led guerrillas; all of them face the immediate danger of com-
munist subversion.

"Soviet intentions with regard to these countries are unmistakably
clear. Using the weapons of subversion, false propaganda and civil war,
the Kremlin has already reduced China to the status of a satellite. The
Soviet rulers have turned their satellite armies loose on the Republic of
Korea. Communist rebellion is raging in Indochina. In Burma, the Philip-
pines, and other places, commmmist-inspired groups are stirring up internal
disorder. In all countries, they are trying to exploit deep-seated economic
aifficulties -- poverty, illiteracy and disease.

"This campaign threatens to absorb the manpower and the vital resources
of the East into the Soviet design of world conquest. It threatens to
deprive the free nations of some of their most vitally needed raw materials.
It threatens to turn more of the peaceful millions of the East into armies
to be used as pawns at the disposal of the Kremlin.

"aside from immediate considerations of security, the continued inde-
pendence of these nations is vital to the future of the free world. Many
of these nations are new to self government. They have dedicated them-
selves to the ideals of nationel independence, of human liberty, and social
progress. Their hundreds of millions of citizens are eager for justice
and liberty and a stake in the future.

A-3
