Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"7, Bearing in mind that in Vietnam altruism is conspicuous
by its absence, blend the proper mixture of the materialistic
appeals of communism and the endemic feelings of nationalism.
Win small but vital gains through communism, large ones through
nationalism. Plan to win in the end not as Communists but as
nationalists.

"8. Use the countryside as the base and carry the struggle
to the cities later; in rural areas political opportunities are
greater and risks smaller. Avoid the lure of the teahouse.

"9. But forge a city alliance. Mobilization of the farmer
must create a strong farmer-worker bond.

"10. Work from the small to the large, from the specific to
the general; work from small safe areas to large liberated areas
and then expand the liberated areas; begin with small struggle
movements and work toward a General Uprising during which state
power will be seized." 129/

The same expert termed General Uprising "a social myth in the Sorelian sense,
perhaps traceable back to the Communist myth of the general strike,” and
cited Viet Cong documents which deseribe how the 2500 villages of Vietnam
will be led toward a spontaneous final and determinant act of revolution:

"The Revolution, directed toward the goal of the General
Uprising, has these five characteristics: ...It takes place in
a very favorable worldwide setting....It is against the neo-
colonialism of the U.S.A.....The government of Vietnam is unpop-
ular and growing weaker....The people have revolutionary conscious-
ness and are willing to struggle....It is led by the Party, which
has great experience." 130/

Ho and Giap thus coated Marx and Mao with French revolutionary romanticism.
Diem, the moral reformer, also drew heavily upon the same traditions for
“personalism." One of the tragedies of modern Vietnam is that the political
awakening of its peasants was to these, the most virulent, and vicious
social theories of the era.

But doctrine was not the sole heritage the Viet Cong received
from the Viet Minh. Perhaps more important was the "Resistance" organiza-
tion: the hierarchy extending upward from hamlet and village through
provincial to regional authorities capable of coordinating action on a
broad scale. The Viet Minh complied with military regroupments under the
Geneva Accords but were not obligated to withdraw the "political" apparatus;
in fact, the Settlement provided guarantees for it in its provisions against
reprisals (Armistice, Article l/c, and Conference Final Declaration,

Article 9), and for liberation of political prisoners (Armistice, Article 21).
Knowledge of the techniques of clandestine politics, appreciation for the
essentiality of tight discipline, and trained personnel constituting a
widespread, basic organizational framework were all advantages the Viet

Ming conferred on the Viet Cong. Needless to say, Ngo Dinh Diem received no
comparable legacy from his nationalist predecessors or the French.

55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
