| ability and the required determination to be an effective President. I

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

g.- Ngo Dinh Diem is still the only Vietnamese with executive

believe there will be another attempt to ‘pet rid of him soon, unless the

‘U.S. makes it clear that we are backing him as the elected top man,

jf the 11 Noyember coup had been successful, I believe that a number
of highly selfish and mediocre people would be squabbling among them-
selves for power while the Communists took over. The Communists
will be more alert to exploit the next coup attempt. At present, most
Vietnamese oppositionists believe that the U, S, would look favorably

_ upon a successful coup.

h. Vietnam has progressed faster in material things than it has
spiritually. The people have more possessions but are starting to lose

_ the will to protect their liberty. There is a big lesson here to be learned

about the U.S, aid program which needs some most serious study.

Recommendations
———_— ee

Before J left Saigon, I discussed my impressions with Ambassador
Durbrow who was most gracious towards me during the visit. Included
in these impressions was my feeling that rnany of the Americans in
Saigon perhaps subconciously believed in defeat, probably had spent too
much time and energy on the political situation in Saigon instead of on
the very real Viet Cong menace, and were in need of some bolstering
up by the Chief of Mission. In this feeling of defeat, J would have to
except the Chief of MAAG and the local CIA Chief who believe we can
win. Ambassador Durbrow told me of the memo he had issued to all
Americans in Saigon after the 11 November coup attempt. I said this

was a good move, but much more than writing a paper was needed,

He asked me what suggestions J had. JI said that I didn't have
much immediately and would have to do a lot of thinking about it. The
Situation in Vietnam is not black and white, but a most complex one in
all shades of gray. Many Americans and Vietnamese expected me to
come up with some sort of a miracle, to turn Ngo Dinh Diem into an
Americanized modern version of the ancient Vietnamese leader Le Loi.
However, the task requires more than a gimmick or some simple
answer. It will take 4 lot of hard work and follow-through. In 12
days, all J] could do was learn as much as J could and to "plant a seed
or two'' with Ngo Dinh Diem and other Vietnamese leaders who know

. that I speak out of deep affection for the free Vietnamese.

er Rp eee = SECRET Sy weet cee

=F | = - 3 i 3 EEE. 1. ee ay 1 ae

meee Es car's Gee a Sees a, TS SES ne ,
ree.
