Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The study argued that leverage was feasible either at the national
level with the GVN leadership in the classic "oriental" style or on

& more systematic basis to be applied through the control of resources
at all levels down to province and district. The study concluded:

D. Courses of Action. US influence over key deci-
sions must be attained as quickly as possible. We recom-
mend the “oriental" approach. However, should the other
alternative of more open exercise of power be selected,
the system would have to include US control of resources.
As a tactical measure, such control could be associated
initially with the introduction of additional resources.
The introduction of greater US control and the procedures
that would be necessary to ensure an adequate US voice in ©
the decision-making process should be tied to the "New Team"
and the new US organization for RD. For that reason, too
long @ delay would be unfortunate. 186/

Whether or not Komer approved this recommendation, it did not figure
in the presentations of pacification given to Secretary McNamara during
his 7-8 July visit to Vietnam. The Saigon policymakers were simply not
prepared to come down on one agreed line of conduct in this contentious
area. This tendency was exhibited later in the summer of 1967 when a
long study on leverage produced in Ambassador Komer's old White House
staff office by two staff members, Dr. Hans Heymann and LTC Volney
Warner, was forwarded from State to Saigon:

In anticipating the uSs/GvN relationship in the post-
election period, it is generally agreed that the US should
find ways to exercise leverage with the Vietnamese govern-
ment which are more commensurate in degree with the importance
of the US effort to South Vietnam's survival and which reflect
the climate of growing restiveness in the US....In its impatience
to get results and make progress, the US has increasingly
resorted to unilateral programs and action with inadequate
consultation with the Vietnamese. On the other hand, the
indiscriminate and careless exercise of US leverage could
undermine the self-respect of the Vietnamese government in
its own eyes and in the eyes of the South Vietnamese people.

To be effective, US leverage must be exercised in the
context of a relationship of mutual respect and confidence,
and in ways commensurate with the objective sought. Jt must
also be backed by credible sanctions. 187/

Might not the post-election period, State suggested, be a proper time

to consider such o new emphasis on the use of leverage. Ambassador
Komer, who had been ardent in his advocacy of leverage while working

as @ Presidential assistant, replied in tempered language which reflected

the chastening effect of several months on the firing line in Saigon:

98 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
