Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"There appears to be an overemphasis on military control
in PROVN which may be undesirable. For instance, the study
states that all senior U.S. representatives (SUSREPs) initi-
ally will be U.S. military officers. This should not neces-
sarily be stated policy. The senior U.S. representative,
particularly at province level, should be selected on basis
of major tasks to be performed, program emphasis in a particu-
lar area and other local considerations. PROVN also limits

U.S. single manager involvement in military activities. If
single manager concept of a fully integrated civil-military
effort is to be successful, military matters, such as roles
and missions, force requirements, and deployments must be
developed in full coordination and be integrated with civil
aspects.

"PROVN proposal for enlarged U.S. organization for
revolutionary development, particularly at sector and sub-
sector levels, will reguire both military and civilian staff
increases. It will necessitate further civilian recruiting
and increased military input. Present shortage of quali-
fied civilian personnel who desire duty in Vietnam must
be considered. It may fall to the military, as it is now
happening to some degree, to provide personnel not only for
added military positions, but also for many of civilian
functions as well.

"Regardless of what U.S. might desire, however, our
efforts to bring about new Vietnamese organizational struc-
ture must be tempered by continuous eyaluation of the press-
wre such change places on Vietnamese leaders. Our goals
cannot be achieved by Vietnamese leaders who are identified
as U.S. puppets. The U.S. will must be asserted, but we
cannot afford to overwhelm the structure we are attempting
to develop.

"Accordingly, MACV recommends that PROVN, reduced pri-
marily to @ conceptual document, carrying forward the main
thrusts and goals of the study, be presented to National
Security Council for use in developing concepts, policies,
and actions to improve effectiveness of the American effort

in Vietnam." 2)/ °
The “Priorities Task Force” -- This group was set up at Ambassador Porter's

direction in April 1966, following Komer's first trip to Vietnam, during
which Komer had strongly urged that the Mission try to establish a set of
interagency priorities. The actual work of this task force, which had
full interagency representation, was considered disappointing by almost
all its “consumers,” particularly Komer, since it failed to come up with
a final list of priorities from which the Mission and Washington could
derive their programs. But it was by far the most ambitious task force
the Mission had ever set up, and it provoked considerable thought in the

Mission.

1% = | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
