Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a major policy address during the coming weeks, relying on news conferences
and speeches by other officials to state the official view. In contrast
to the Rostow approach, his news conference of 23 June and Secretary Rusk's
speech at Williems College, 14 June, emphasized the U.S. determination to
support its Southeast Asian allies, but avoided any direct challenge to
Hanoi and Peking or any hint of intent to increase our military commit-
ment. 117/

In addition, the President asked his advisers the basic question,
"Would the rest of Southeast Asia necessarily fall if Laos and South Viet-
nam came under North Vietnamese control?" On 9 Jume, the Board of National
Estimates, CIA, provided a response, stating:

"With the possible exception of Cambodia, it is likely
that no nation in the area would quickly succumb to com-
munism as a result of the fall of Laos and South Vietnam.
Furthermore, a continuation of the spread of communism
in the area would not be inexorable, and any spread which
did occur would take time -- time in which the total situ-
ation might change in any of a number of ways unfavorable
to the communist cause." 118/

The statement went on to argue that the loss of South Vietnam and Laos
"vould be profoundly damaging to the U.S. position in the Far East," be-
cause of its impact on U.S. prestige and on the credibility of our other
commitments to contain the spread of communism. It did not suggest that
such a loss would affect the wider U.S. interest in containing overt mili-
tary attacks. Our island base, it argued, would probably still enable

us to employ enough military power in the area to deter Hanoi and Peking
from this kind of aggression. It cautioned, however, that the leadership
in Peking (as well as Hanoi) would profit directly by being able to justify -
its militant policies with demonstrated success and by having raised "its
prestige as a leader of World Communism" at the expense of the more moder-
ate USSR.

E. Sources of Moderate Advice

The strength of the Board's warning was weakened by two signifi-
eant caveats. The first linked the estimate's less-than~alarmist view
to a clearly "worst case";

"This memorandum assumes a clear-cut communist vic-
tory in these countries, i.e., a withdrawal of U.S. forces
and virtual elimination of U.S. presence in Indochina,
either preceded or soon followed by the establishment of
communist regimes in Laos and South Vietnem. The results
of a fuzzier, piecemeal victory, such as one staged through
a 'neutralist' phase, would probably be similar, though
somewhat less sharp and severe." 119/

36 TOP. SECRET - Sensitive
