Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to targets most directly engaged in the battlefield area and
that this meant that there would be no bombing north of 20th
parallel. snnouncement would leave open low Hanoi might
respond, and would be open-ended as to time. However, it would
indicate that Hanoi's response could be helpful in determining
whether we were justified in assumption that Hanoi would not
take advantage if we stopping bombing altogether. Thus, it
would to this extent foreshadow possibility of full bombing
stoppage at a later point. 64/

The significance of the decision they were to communicate
to their respective heads of government could hardly have been lost on the
Ambassadors. Nevertheless, the cable dramatized the importance of pre-
venting premature leaks by stating that the Ambassadors were to tell the
heads of Government to whom they were accreditted that they were "under
strictest injunction to hold it in total confidence and not to tell any one
repeat anyone until after announcement is made. This is vital. Similarly
you should tell no member of your staff whatever." 65/ It is important to
note that the cable defines the delimited area for the bombing halt as north
of 20°. This apparently was the intent of the President and his advisors
all along, but sometime before the speech was delivered any specific reference
to the geographic point of limitation was eliminated, for undetermined reasons,
if it ever had been included.

The March 30 cable offered the Ambassadors some additional
explanatory rationale for the new course that they were to use at their dis-
eretion in conversations with their heads of government. These are important
because they represent the only available recorded statement by the Adminis-
tration of its understanding of the purposes and expectations behind the new
direction in Vietnam.policy. It is also significant that the points con-
cerning the bombing halt are extremely close to those in Secretary Rusk's
draft points of March 5. Here, then, is how the Administration understood
the new policy, and wished to have understood by our allies:

a. You should call attention to force increases that
would be announced at the same time and would make clear our
continued resolve. Also our top priority to re-equipping ARVN
forces. -

b. You should make clear that Hanoi is most likely to
denounce the project and thus free our hand after a short
period... Nonetheless, we might wish to continue the Limitation
even after a formal denunciation, in order to reinforce its
sincerity and put the monkey firmly on Hanoi's back for what-
ever follows. Of course, any major military change, could compel
full-scale resumption at any time.

ec. With or without denunciation, Hanoi might well feel
limited in conducting any major offensives at least in the

195 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
