Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho's self-analysis, in.relation to Indochina's development is a
markedly honest one, in Marxist terms. From the outset, Marxism was
far more than a blueprint for him. It was a logique, and as one of
' the keenest Indochina scholars, Paul Mus, has pointed out, it was
acguired by Ho as a vital Western weapon, an arsenal in fact, with
which, as an Asian, he could combat his French masters. Ho, as a
Marxist, was quick to appreciate how his country was being robbed,
kept in economic penury by a purposefully unimaginative colonial power.
While the French took out rubber or rice or whatever else they wanted
and sold it in the world marker at a high profit, the Vietnamese lived
under a system in which only human labor and not money, in any inter-
national sense, counted; goods were in effect bartered for subsistence.
Such an economic condition became the fulcrum of Ho's anger and drove
him way back, almost inevitably, to Marxism and thence to Communism.
"Ho had to build on what every Asian must build per se," Mus says, "a
Western logic to deal with us Europeans. Whether it be a profession
such as the law or medicine or what have you, an Asian must find this
logique or be lost. Ho found it first in Marxism and he became a
Leninist, since Lenin was faced in Russia with the same problem of the
vacuum at the village level. Ho was successful because he remained true
to Leninism and Marxism, In this sense, straightforward according to
his view, he belongs to a proper fraternity.”

Along with Sainteny, Mus is one of those Frenchmen who admit that
France and the Western world missed a proper opportunity with Ho in
1946. Mus himself, as a French negotiator, met Ho a year later, and
he has the same queer fondness for him most men who knew him have
retained. "I have no reason, as a Frenchman, to like Ho for what he
has done," Mus told me long afterward, "but still I like him. TI am
not afraid to say so. I like him for his strong mind. Although he
is a great actor--one cannot afford to be naive with him--he does not
go back on his word. He believes in the truth as he sees it. But he
is a Marxist, and that is where we part company." He quotes Ho as
telling him, in 1947, "My only weapon is anger....I won't disarm my
people until I trust you." Ho's willingness to deal with the French,
Mus believes, was largely predicated on his need for French advice, above
all for financial advisers. "Marxist doctrine calls for the proletarian
state to use, at least temporarily, the accountancy of the bourgeois-
capitalist countries," Mus says. Because of the inbred economy imposed
by the Bank of Indochina, Ho knew that Vietnam could not stand on its
own feet, either in terms of money or trade. He also knew he could not
rely on the colonial French. His political approach was through metro-
politan France. He wasn't convinced that this was his only chance, but
he was determined to play the possibilities. He wavered between his
affection and regard for France, which had given him his self in the
Marxist image, and his new disillusion of 1946. "If we had supported

Ca16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
