Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

CONFERENCE DOCUMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS

d. In cooperation with other Allies conduct operations, if requir, 1
to libevate enemy-oecupied areas.

IV. THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN
. * * l
Strategic Direction of the War

8. We have discussed the strategic direction of the war again:-
Japan and have agreed as follows:—

a. The control of operational strategy in the Pacific Theater yin
remain in the hands of the United States Chiefs of Staff. i;

b. The United States Chiefs of Sta will provide the British Chic:
of Siafl with full and timely information as to their future plans ey-
intentions.

c. The United Siates Chiofs of Staff will consult the British Chic!.
of Staff on matters of general strategy on the understanding that j.
the event of disacreement the final decision on the action to be take:
will lie with the United States Chiefs of Staff,

d, In the event the British Chiefs of Staff should decide that the,
cannot commit British troops in support of a decision made by th.
United States Chiefs of Staff as indicated in c. above, the Britis),
Chiefs of Staff will give to the United States Chiefs of Stafl suri,
advance notice of their decision as will permit them to make timely
rearrangements.

e. In the eyent the U.S. S. R. entors the war against Japan, ths
stratesy to be pursued should be discussed between the parties con-
cerned.

Operations in the Pacijie

9. We have taken note of the plans and operations proposed b-
the United States Chiefs of Staff in Appendix “A.”

10. We have considered the scope and nature of British participa-
tion in operations in the Pacific area. Our conclusions are as follows:—

a. The British Pacific Peet will participate as at present plennod.

b. A British very long range bomber force of 10 squadrons, increz:-
ing to 20 squadrons when more airfields become available, will per-
ticipate. There is little prospect that airfield space for more thar
10 squadrons, of this force will become available before 1 December
1945 at the earliest.

c. We have agreed in principle that a Commonwealth land forer
and, if possible, a small tactical air force, should take part in the
final phase of the war against Japan, subject to the satisfactory
resolution of operational and other problems. In addition, some
units of the British * Mast Indies Fleot may also take part.

11. In connection with paragraph 10 c. above, we have egreci!
that the appropriate British commanders and staff should visit
Admiral Nimitz and General MacArthur and draw up with them
s plan for submission to the Combined Chiefs of Staff,

3 The word “British” does nob appear at this point in C, C. 5, 900/2,
