Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and controlled Daliang, but demonstrators were operating freely from
pagodas in Saigon, and the Struggle Movement had absolute control of
Hue, where in the next few days they surrounded and blockaded the con-
sulate. In Saigon GVN followed Lodge's advice and neutralized the
pegodas by surrounding them without violating them; but in the I Corps.
he was preparing to occupy Hue forcefully as he had Daliang. The
Buddhists began a series of self-immolations. Amid mounting threats,
the U.S. evacuated the consulate and its other facilities in Hue. 23/

lodge was unreservedly sympathetic to Ky, as in April, and viewed
the Buddhists as equivalent to card-carrying Communists; but he followed
instructions and pressed Ky to be conciliatory. When Ky would blurt out
fire-eating statements and whittle down his previous promises on elec-
tions, Lodge would patiently urge him to avoid off-the-cuff statements
and to limit himself to prepared statements on radio and TV. Lodge and
Westmoreland repeatedly pressed Ky and Thi to get together, which they
did on May 27; Ky offered Thi and Dinh unspecified Army jobs. 2/
State was gratified, but cautious. 25/

4, Ky Restores GVN Control in I Corps, June 1966

One of the main subjects of Lodge's conferences in Washington was
what the U.S. Government position should be on elections for the Con-
stituent Assembly. Having finished deliberations and drafting after
Lodge returned to Saigon, State cebled the principles it thought should
guide the Mission's operations on election matters:

A. General Principles of U.S, Action

The U.S. Mission should seek to exert maximum influ-
ence toward the achievement of the substantive objectives
stated in B. below. At the same time, this must be done
with recognition that a key objective is to avoid anti-
Americanism becoming a major issue; we shall be accused
of interferences in any event, but it is vitally important
not to give potential anti-American elements (or the press
and outside observers) any clear handle to hit us with.

B. Objectives

l. Elections should be held as announced by GVN on
April 15th, that is by September 15 of this year.

2. The issue of anti-Americanism should be kept out
of the election campaign as far as possible.

3. The question as to whether the constitutional
assembly will only have the role of drafting the constitu-
tion or will have some further function should not be
allowed to become an active pre-election issue and the
U.S. should take no position on this question.

20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
