Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET

during 1952 to turn the bulk of their regular
forces toward the conquest of northwestern
Tonkin and northern Laos, areas lightly held
by isolated French Union garrisons.

_ 41. In this manner, the Viet Minh probably
-hope to retain the military and political in-

bs _ itiative and, by dispersing French Union

forces, to prevent either a clean-up by the
French Union in the Tonkin delta or offensive
operations by the French Union against Viet
Minh troop concentrations and supply in-
stallations outside the delta, The Viet Minh

“may well believe that by gradually extending .

their base areas in lightly defended regions
of Laos, Cambodia, and central Vietnam they
can keep French Union forces dispersed and
pinned down indefinitely. In time, they
probably expect to sap the morale of the
- Vietnamese and the French and finally so
alter the balance of power as to make possible
successful Viet Minh attacks against the key
areas of Tonkin and south Vietnam.

12. The deployment of four divisions into
Laos by the Viet Minh and the fact that the
French did not attack their long and exposed
lines of communication typify the over-all
‘situation in Indochina. French Union forces
still outweigh the Viet Minh in numbers, fire-
power, and materiel. French ability to air
lift troops and equipment, although strained
at the present time, provides the French
Union with tactical flexibility in planning
defensive anc offensive operations. The Viet
Minh, however, by their skill in guerrilla war,
their ability to move rapidly and to infiltrate
and control areas under nominal French
occupation, have caused the French to com-
mit large forces throughout Indochina to
static defense, thus seriously reducing French
ability to take the offensive.

13. Viet Minh regular forces in northern In-
dochina have continued their gradual evolu-
tion from lightly armed guerrilla bands to a
regularly organized military force. They
have made noticeable advances in the devel-
opment of field communications, and, unit
firepower has increased ajthough they still
possess only limited amounts of artillery.
Viet Minh combat effectiveness is still limited

by a lack of medical supplies and an inability
to sustain major military operations.

14. Military aid from the US has enabled the
French Union to equip adequately their reg-
ular ground forces. The French air forces,
with US logistical support, and with no air
opposition, have maintained a fair degree of
effectiveness in paratroop operations, supply
by air drops, and daylight attacks on enemy
supply dumps. French naval forces have
improved in combat effectiveness and have
maintained control of the seacoasts and in-
land waterways. However, the Viet Minh
have the continuing capability to threaten
control of the inland waterways by a mining
campaign. Some Vietnamese National Army
units have performed creditably in combat,
but desertion and “missing in action” figures ©
remain high. For the most part, Vietnamese
National Guard and other local security
forces lack the firepower, discipline, and lead-
ership to hold positions alone against regular
Viet Minh units which infiltrate tte Tonkin
delta. ‘

15, Although French Union military capabili-
ties haye improved slightly, the French
Union military effort has been inhibited by
considerations of domestic French politics,
French security in Europe, and fear of in-
volvement in a war with Communist China.
These considerations have caused French
commanders in Indochina to forego aggres-
sive military operations that would entail
heayy casualties and have prevented them
from obtaining reinforcements on a scale that
might make possible the defeat of the Viet
Minh.

16. The development of the Vietnamese Na-
tional Army, promised by the French in 1949,
has been retarded by a shortage of officers
and non-commissioned officers, by French
lack of faith in the Vietnamese and by French
fiscal problems. There has also been an un-
willingness among many Vietnamese leaders,
not including Premier Tam, to undertake a
major mobilization efiort until the French
zrant further political concessions and until
the Vietnamese character of the new army
is fully guaranteed.

SECRET

Ag
