Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

whether to continue the program of air attacks in the
Hanoi-Haiphong area or for an indefinite period to
concentrate all attacks on the lines of communication in
the lower half of North Vietnam (south cf 20°). 81/

Short of attacking the ports, which was rejected as
risking confrontation with the USSR, the Memorandum said, there were
few important targets left. The alternative of striking minor fixed
targets and continuing armed reconnaissance. against the transportation
system north of 20° was relatively costly, risky, and unprofitable:

We have the alternative open to us of continuing to
conduct attacks between 20-23° -- that is, striking minor
fixed targets (like battery, fertilizer, and rubber plants
and barracks) while conducting armed reconnaissance against
movement on roads, railroads and waterways. This course,
however, is costly in American lives and involves serious
dangers of escalation. The loss rate in Hanoi-Haiphong
Route Package 6 [ the northeast quadrant/, for example, is
more than six times the loss rate in the southernmost
Route Packages 1 and @; and actions in the Hanoi-Haiphong
area involve serious risks of generating confrontations with
the Soviet Union and China, both because they involve
destruction of MiGs on the ground and encounters with the
MIGs in the air and because they may be construed as a US
intention to erush the Hanoi regime.

The military gain from destruction of additional mili-
tary targets north of 20° will be slight. If we believed
that air attacks in that area would change Hanoi's will, they
might be worth the added loss of American life and the risks
of expansion of the war. However, there is no evidence that
this will be the case, while there is considerable evidence
that such bombing will strengthen Hanoi'’s will. In this
connection, Consul-General Rice [ot Hong Kong/...said what
we believe to be the case -- that we cannot by bombing reach
the critical level of pain in North Vietnam and that, "below
that level, pain only increases the will to fight." Sir

.Robert Thompson, who was a key officer in the British
suecess in Malaya, said...that our bombing, particularly
jn the Red River basin, "is unifying North Vietnam." 82/

Nor, the Memorandum continued, was bombing in northernmost NVN essential
for the morale of SVN end US troops. General Westmoreland fully supported
strikes in the Hanoi/Haiphong area and had even said, as noted before,
that he was "frankly dismayed at even the thought of stopping the bombing
program," but his basic requirement was for continuation of bombing in

the "extended battle zone" near the DMZ.

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
