Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"So whet we are doing is supporting the Vietnamese and the French
in their conduct of that war; because, as we see it, it is a case of
independent and free nations operating against the encroachment of
communism."

hk. Address by Secretary Dulles before the Overseas Press Club of America

at New York City on March 29, 1954, The Threat of a Red Asia. Depart-

ment of State Bulletin, April 12, 1954, p. 539:

"This provides a timely occasion for outlining the administration's
thinking about two related matters -- Indochina and the Chinese Communist
regime.

"Indochina is important for many reasons. First, and always first,
are the human values. About 30 million people are seeking for themselves
the dignity of self-government. Until a few years ago, they formed merely
a French dependency. Now, their three political units -- Viet-Naem, Leos,
and Cambodia -- are exercising a considerable measure of independent
political authority within the French Union. Each of the three is now
recognized by the United States and by more than 30 other nations. They
signed the Japanese peace treaty with us. Their independence is not yet
complete. But the French Government last July declared its intention to
complete that independence, and negotiations to consummate that pledge
are actively under way.

"The United States is watching this development with close attention
and great sympathy. We do not forget that we were a colony that won its
freedom. We have sponsored in the Fhilippines a conspicuously successful
development of political independence. We feel a sense of kinship with
those everywhere who yearn for freedom. ;

"The Communists are attempting to prevent the arderly development of
independence and to confuse the issue before the world. The Communists
have, in these matters, a regular line which Stalin laid down in 1924.

"The scheme is to whip up the spirit of nationalism so that it
becomes violent. That is done by professional agitators. Then the
violence is enlarged by Communist military and technical leadership and
the provision of military supplies. In these ways, international com-
minism gets a stranglehold on the people and it uses that power to
‘amalgamate’ the peoples into the Soviet orbit.

"thmalgamation' is Lenin's and Stalin's word to describe their process.

"tamalgamation' is now being attempted in Indochina under the ostensible
leadership of Ho Chi Minh. He was indoctrinated in Moscow. He became an
associate of the Russian, Borodin, when the latter was organizing the Chinese
Communist Party which was to bring China into the Soviet orbit. Then Ho
transferred his activities to Indochina.

*

B-6
