Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

III. Different.Policy Perceptions in Planning

A. ‘Two basic approaches: JCS and State-ISA

The principal planning agencies responding to the President's
directive regarding Recommendations 11 and 12 were the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and the Department of State together with OSD/ISA, and the two ef-
forts took rather different approaches. The JCS responded literally to
the instructions and tasked CINCPAC to prepare an action program of bor-
der control and retaliatory operations with 72-hour responsiveness and
one of "graduated overt military pressure by GVN and U.S. forces" against
North Vietnam with 30-day responsiveness. The JCS preparation for near-
term implementation of these recommendations went beyond the usual con-
tingency planning as indicated by their instruction that CINCPAC's plan
"permit sequential implementation" of the three actions. 37/ The JCS
approved. the CINCPAC submission, as OPLAN 37-64, on 17 April 1964. 38/

The State-ISA planning activity proceeded under the apparent
belief that the actions included in Secretary MecNamara's Recommendation
12 were approved as contingency options, one or more or none of which might
be selected for implementation at some time in the future. In fact, State
believed the Secretary's categories of action were not in keeping with
likely developments -- "that eross-border/ actions against Cambodia and
Laos are dependent heavily on the political position in these countries
at the time, and that, in general, it seems more likely that we would wish
to hold off in hitting Cambodia until we had gone ahead hard against North
Vietnam itself...there appear to be reasons not to open up other theaters
until we have made clear that North Vietnam is the main theater and have
not really started on it." Further, it questioned the utility of tit-
for-tat retaliatory actions because of (1) the difficulty of responding
in kind, or in a fitting manner, to the most likely -- terrorist -- vari-
ety of VC provocations and (2) their inappropriateness for conveying "the.
picture of concerted and steadily rising pressures that reflect complete
U.S. determination to finish the job." 39/ Accordingly, the State-ISh
effort began by developing a political scenario designed to accommodate
only the graduated military pressures referred to in Recommendation 12.
These were divided into three major categories: (1) covert GVN action
against North Vietnam with covert U.S. support; (2) overt GVN action with
covert U.S. support; and (3) overt joint GVN and U.S. action. The two
categories involving overt activities were conceived of as possible future
developments, contingent upon a Presidential decision that clearly had.
not been made. 40

B. Different Approaches: Perceptions of the Strategic Problem
in Southeast Asia

7 The differences in approach taken in the two planning efforts can-
not be explained simply by the obvious military and political division of
labor. It is clear from documents of the period that there was consider-
able coordination between the two groups, with the JCS planners looking

to State and ISA for political guidance and the latter group looking to

the former for recommendations for appropriate military actions. More
fundamental was the. existence of different perceptions of the strategic

11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
