Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

To these manpower diversions CINCPAC added the cost to North
Vietnam in 1967 of the destruction of vital resources -- the third of
his air war objectives:

Cc. Destroying vital resources:

Air attacks were authorized and executed by target
systems for the first time in 1967, although the attacks
were limited to specific targets within each system. A
total of 9,740 sorties was flown against targets on the
ROLLING THUNDER target List from 1 January - 15 December
1967. The campaign against the power system resulted in
reduction of power generating capability to approximately
15 percent of original capacity. Successful strikes against
the Thai Nguyen iron and steel plant and the Haiphong cement
plant resulted in practically total destruction of these
two installations. NVN adjustments to these losses have
had to be made by relying on additional imports from China,
the USSR or the Eastern European countries. The require-
ment for additional imports reduces available shipping space
for war supporting supplies and adds to the congestion at
the ports. Interruptions in raw material supplies and the
requirement to turn to less efficient means of power and dis-
tribution has degraded overall production.

Economic losses to North Vietnam amounted to more
than $130 million dollars in 1967, representing over one-half
of the total economic losses since the war began. 70/

This defense of the importance and contribution of the air
campaign to the overall effort in Vietnam was seconded by General West-
moreland later in January when he sent his year-end summary of progress
+o Washington. In discussing the efforts of his men on the ground in the
South he described the bombing of the North as "indispensable" in cutting
the flow of support and maintaining the morale of his forces. hy It
is worth noting that COMUSMACV's optimistic assessment was dispatched
just 4 days before the enemy launched his devastating Tet offensive,
proving thereby formidable capability to marshall men and materiel for
massive attacks at times and places of his choosing, the bombing notwith-
standing.

Less than a week later, Secretary McNamara appeared before
‘congress for the presentation of his last annual "posture" statement.
These regular January testimonies had become an important forum in which
the Secretary reviewed the events of the preceding year, presented the
pudget for the coming year and outlined the programs for the Defense
establishment for the next five years. In 611 cases he had begun with
a broad brush review of the international situation and in recent years

13) Re SECRET - Sensitive
