Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

163

TOP SECRET — SENSITIVE

and a resumption of hostilities in Laos. This could present us with

a choice between the use of combat forces in Laos or an abandonment

of that country to full Communist control. At the present time, there
is at least a chance that a settlement can be reached in Laos on the
basis of a weak and unsatisfactory Souvanna Phouma Government. ‘The
prospective agreement on Laos includes a provision that Laos will not
be used as a transit area or as a base for interfering in the affairs
of other countries such as South Viet-Nam. After a Laotian settlement,
the introduction of United States forces into Viet-Nam could serve to
stabilize the position both in Viet-Nam and in Laos by registering our
determination to see to it that the Laotian settlement was as far as
the United States would be willing to see Communist influence in South-
east Asia develop. .

{- The Need for Multilateral Action.

From the political point of view, both domestic and international,
it would seem important to involve forces from other nations alongside
of United States Category (B) forces in Viet-Nam. It would be diffi-
cult to explain to our own people why no effort had been made to in-
voke SEATO or why the United States undertook to carry this burden
unilaterally. Our position would be greatly strengthened if the intro-
duction of forces could be taken as a SEATO action, accompanied by
units of other SEATO countries, with a full SEATO report to the United
Nations of the purposes of the action itself.

Apart from the armed forces, there would be political advantage
in elisting the interest of other nations, including neutrals, in the
security and well-being of South Viet-Nam. This might be done by seek-
ing such assistance as Malayan police officals (recently offered Diem
by the Tunku) and by technical assistance personnel in other fields,
either bilaterally or through international organizations.

8. Initial Diplomatic Action by the United States.

If the recommendations, below, are approved, the United States
should consult intensively with other SEATO governments to obtain their
full support of the course of action contemplated. At the appropriate
stage, a direct approach should be made by the United States to Moscow,
through normal or special channels, pointing out that we cannot accept
the movement of cadres, arms and other supplies into South Viet-Nam in
support of the guerrillas. We should also discuss the problem with
neutral governments in the general area and get them to face up to
their own interests in the security of South Viet—Nam; these govern-
ments will be concerned about (a) the introduction of United States
combat forces and (b) the withdrawal of United States support from
Southeast Asia; their concern, therefore, might be usefully expressed
either to Communist bloc countries or in political support for what
may prove necessary in South Viet-Nam itself.

128

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
