Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Director of the CIA does not make a recommendation.
The CIA judgment is that none of the alternatives is capable
of decreasing Hanoi's determination to persist in the war
or of reducing the flow of goods sufficiently to affect the
war in the South. 162/

The arguments for and against the three alternatives were
developed at considerable length in the memo. The summary gave the fol-
lowing rationale for the McNemara-Vance position:

In the memorandum, Mr. Vance and I:

--Oppose the JCS program (ALTERNATIVE.A) on grounds
that it would neither substantially reduce the flow of men
and supplies to the South nor pressure Hanoi toward settle-
ment, that it would be costly in American lives and in
domestic and world opinion, and that it would run serious
risks of enlarging the war into on: with the Soviet Union
and China, leaving us a few months from now more frustrated
and with almost no choice but even further escalation.

--Oppose mere refinement of the present program
(ALTERNATIVE C) on grounds that it would involve most of
the costs and some of the risks of ALTERNATIVE A with less
chance that ALTERNATIVE A of either interdicting supplies

or moving Hanoi toward settlement.

--Recommend concentration of the bulk of our efforts
en infiltration routes south of 20° (ALTERNATIVE B) because
this course would interdict supplies as effectively as the
other alternatives, would cost the least in pilots' lives,
and would be consistens with effort to move toward negoti-
ations. 163/

These: views were stated in somewhat expanded form in in the concluding
paragraphs of the DFM:

TI am convinced that, within the limits to which we can
go with prudence, "strategic" bombing of North Vietnam will
at best be unproductive. I am convinced that mining the
ports would not only be unproductive bu, very costly in
domestic and world support and very dangerous -- running
high risks of enlarging the war as the program is carried
out, frustrated and with no choice but to escalate further.
At the same time, I am doubtful that bombing the infil-
tration routes north or south of 20° will put a meaningful

T2 S TOP SECRET - Sensitive
