ha

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

he 'shudders'...." 69/ Apart from that his concerns about the barrier
were minor (although he did propose a NIKE battalion for use in a
surface to surface role in support of the barrier).

On his way home from Manila, the President made the now
famous dramatic visit to U.S. troops at Cam Ranh Bay. Once home, how-
ever, he deferred any major decisions on the war until after the elections.
Several "peace" candidates were aggressively challenging Administration
supporters in the off-year Congressional contests and the President wished
ta do nothing that might boost their chances. As it turned out, they were
overwhelmingly defeated in the November 8 balloting.

Meanwhile, at the Pentagon the dispute over the level of
effort for the air war continued. Even before Manila, the Chiefs had
attempted to head off McNamara's recommendation for stabilizing the
bombing with a request for a 25 percent increase in B-52 sorties per
month. 70/ The Secretary, for his part, was showing considerable con-
cern over the high attrition rates of ROLLING THUNDER aircraft. Among
other things he questioned the utility of committing pilots to repeated
risks when the operational return from many of the missions was so small
and the expectations for achieving significant destruction so minimal. ai

The force level arguments had continued during the President's
trip too. On October 20, CINCPAC forwarded his revised Force Planning Program
containing the results of the October 5-1) Honolulu Planning Conference to
the JCS. 72 In effect, it constituted a reclama to the Secretary's
October 14 recommendations. CINCPAC requested U.S. ground forces totalling
493,969 by end CY 1967; 519,310 by end CY 1968; and 520,020 by end CY 1969.
But the total by end CY 1969 would really be 555,262 reflecting an addi-
tional 35,721 troops whose availability was described in the planning
document as "unknown." 73/

With respect to the air war, CINCPAC stated a requirement
for an additional ten tactical fighter squadrons (TFS) and an additional
aircraft carrier to support both an intensification of the air war in the
North and the additional maneuver battalions requested for the war in the
South. These new squadrons were needed to raise sortie levels in the North
above 12,000/month in CY 1967. Of these ten TFS, the Air Force indicated
that three were unavailable and the Secretary of Defense had previously
deferred deployment of five. Nonetheless, the requirement was reiterated. 7T4/
They were needed to implement the strategic concept of the air mission in
SRA that CINCPAC had articulated on September 5 and that was included
again here as justification. 75/ Moreover, the objective of attacking
the ports and water LOCs was reiterated as well. 16/

On November 4, the JCS sent the Secretary these CINCPAC

orce planning recommendations with their own slight upward revision of
ae as figures to an eventual end strength of 558,432. Tt In the
pody of the memo they endorse the CINCPAC air war recommendations in

ay (a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
