Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on North Vietnamese resources, import capability and population centers
along the lines of proposals from CINCPAC:

The present restrictions on bombing NVN would be lifted
so as to permit bombing of military targets without the present
scrupulous concern for collateral civilian damage and casu-
alties. The following targets systems would be emphasized:

1. Military control points, military headquarters,
storage facilities, government control centers, and such
population centers as are known to harbor dispersed materiel
and vehicles.

2. The Ports of Haiphong, Hon Gai and Cam Pha, by
a combination of mining and bombing. This would be designed
to force over-the-beach delivery of seaborne imports which
would require shipping to remain off the coast in unsheltered
waters, thereby restricting operations to periods of relative
calm seas.

3. Over-the-beach deliveries by bombing and possibly
mining.

- h, Intensified bombing attacks on the northeast
and northwest rail lines and other road LOCs contiguous to the
WVN-Chicom border. 48/

The objective to be achieved by this expanded campaign was described in
the succeeding paragraph:

The aims of this alternative campaign would be to erode
the will of the population by exposing a wider area of NVN to
casualties and destruction; to reduce maritime imports by
closing the major ports, and by attacking the resulting over-the-
beach deliveries; to bring about a saturation of remaining import
arteries, thereby creating greater target densities; and to
disrupt the movement of supplies into SVN by attacking mili-
tary control points and storage facilities wherever located.
The hopeful assumption is that North Vietnam would then be
forced to decide on a priority of imports--war-making goods
vs. life-supporting goods--and that it would choose the
latter. This in turn would attenuate its ability to supply
forces in SVN and would thus slow down the tempo of the
fighting there. In time, these cumulative pressures would
be expected to bring NVN to negotiation of a compromise
settlement, or to abandonment of the fight in SVN. hg/

183 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
