Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Yugoslavia toward the Soviet Union. Ho, like Tito, had had cordial wartime
relations with us. He apparently expected our continued friendship and. had
more to hope for in economic aid from us than China. He and his associates
were ardent nationalists and probably had deeper fears and, suspicions of

the Chinese than the Yugoslavs had of the Russians. While such a Vietnam
might have been more circumspect and. respectful toward China then Tito has
been toward the Soviet Union, it would probably have been even more fiercely
independent. The way in which Hanoi has sought to maintain its independence
of Peking and. Moscow, despite the military dependence on both, which was
forced on it by the protracted war with us, suggests how strongly independent
a Communist Vietnam would have been, if not pushed by these military necessi-
ties.

Would such a Communist regime in all Vietnam have been a serious menace
to its neighbors or to world peace? I doubt it. A Communist take-over
in all Vietnam shortly after the end of the war would probably have seemed
to the rest of the world no more of a Communist triumph than the successive
victories of Communists over anti-Communists that have taken place in Viet-
nam since 1945. It is hard to believe that a united Commnist Vietnam would °
have had any more harmful an influence on Laos than a divided war-torn
Vietnam has had. Laos and Cambodia might have fallen under Vietnamese in-
fluence, but this at least would have kept them out of Chinese control.
Or, possibly, Cambodia's traditional animosity toward Vietnam would have
induced it to veer further away than it has from association with the Com-
munist nations, if South Vietnam, too, had been Communist. ‘Thailand would
probably have been less adversely affected by an entirely Communist Vietnam
than it has been by the prolonged war there. Meanwhile, a united, strongly
nationalistic Vietnam, while paying lip service to Communist China, would
probably have served as a far more effective dike against the southward
extension of Chinese power and influence than have a North Vietnam forced
into military dependence on China and an unstable South Vietnam. And this
general situation in Vietnam and Southeast Asia, which would have been so
much less unsatisfactory for us than what we have today, would have been
achieved without any of the terrible costs that have mounted so high.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-30
