714

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that there was a war to be won. Object was to restore order, not
to create disorder. I said I recognized that this was a delicate
judgment, in my opinion, as a friend of his country and of him,
his greater risk was to stand pat, or act too cautiously...

On the whole, I am not discouraged at Diem's reaction. In
fact, he took our proposals rather better than I had expected.
He has promised to call me as soon as he has been able to reflect
upon our proposals and, until we have heard his considered re-
action, I think it would be idle to speculate on outcome... 22/

On the 20th, Nolting met with Thuan, who among other things said the
U.S. offer had set Diem to wondering "whether U.S. getting ready to back
out on Vietnam...as we had done in Laos." Nolting hoped Thuan's bleak
report was only a bargaining tactic.

Thuan said that Diem had not yet discussed fully with him
US proposals presented last Friday; but had given him impression
of being ‘very sad and very disappointed.’ Thuan said Diem had
Said he now hesitates to put proposals before even his cabinet
ministers, fearing that they would be disappointed and lose heart.
He had intended to discuss US proposals with both cabinet and
selected members of assembly who had been consulted re advisability
of US forces at time of Taylor Mission, but now thought contrast
between his earlier question and our proposals too striking. Thuan
conveyed impression that Diem is brooding over US proposals and
has made no move yet to develop specific ideas on actions GVN
expected to take. Thuan said President's attitude seemed to be
that US asking great concessions of GVN in realm its sovereignty,
in exchange for little additional help; that this is great dis-
appointment after discussions with General Taylor involving, in
particular, concept of Delta Task Force; that Diem seemed to
wonder whether US was getting ready to back out on Viet Nam, as he
suggested, we had done in Laos. 23/

There followed a long discussion in which Thuan deseribed all the dif-
ficulties that would be involved in doing what the U.S. was asking, in-
eluding the risk of looking like a U.S. puppet.

There is nothing in our record to indicate any U.S. reconsideration
of the decision against sending the military task force. Thus, if Diem
and Thuan's response was a bargaining tactic to get the task force, it
failed. On the other hand, if Diem was using disappointment over the
failure to send the task force as a bargaining counter to get the U.S. to
relent on its demands for reforms, then he got just what he wanted. But
what amounted to a complete U.S. reversal on these demands also may have been
influenced by the advice Kennedy -received from John Kenneth Galbraith at
this time. Kennedy had asked Galbraith to stop by Saigon on his return to

139
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
