Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

gear a second Deputy Ambassador) should be appointed; and
2) what extent individual agency personnel, funds, and opera-
tions devoted to rural construction could and should be broken
out of agency organizations and placed under the direction of
the single focal point..." 39/

COMMENT: Here was the compromise wording on the issue which concerned
the participants at Warrenton a great deal. Each representative at
Warrenton brought with him a proposed organization chart for the
Mission (see below), but no agreement could be reached at that time.
In the main body of the memorandum to the principals on January 13,
1966, Unger and Porter wrote:

"The optimum organization for the U.S. Mission for
its support ‘of the rural construction/pacification
program -- a senior official with a supporting staff with
full-time responsibility in this field was considered
necessary. (Coordination is also required with Ambassador
Lodge and Mr. Bell on this point.) It would also be
desirable for such an official to have in Washington a
high-level point of liaison to assure the expeditious
discharge here of urgent Vietnam business in this field..." 4o/

When he reported to the Mission Liaison Group on Warrenton
two weeks later, on January 27, 1966, Porter sharply dowplayed the
move for reorganization which was coming from Washington and changed
the emphasis. He said:

"a. No decision was reached at Warrenton with
respect to a U.S. in-country organization for rural: con-
struction, although the possibility of a single manager
was discussed.

"bh. The U.S. Mission will continue to support Rural
Construction with the same organizational structure it is now
using, placing particular reliance on the Mission Liaison Group.

"o, Officials in Washington were concerned about teamwork
among the U.S. agencies in Vietnam but not about ability to do
the job. Differences of opinion are expected, and machinery

exists to resolve them. Differences due to personalities can-
not be tolerated.

"q, It is clearly understood in Washington that military
operations alone are not enough, and that effective Rural
' Construction is imperative. The highest levels in the USG
are keenly aware of the importance of US/GVN work in Rural
Construction...." 41/ /®mphasis Added/

25 ‘ TOP SECRET = Sensitive
