Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

120
- TOP SECRET - Sensitive

SNIE, i.e., what effect bombing might produce on the will of the

North Vietnamese regime. Judging from a summary with some extracts,
preserved in Task Force files, it made a stiong case for almost

unlimited bombing such as CINCPAC and the JCS had steadily advocated.

It accepted previous judgments that "the goals of sustained interdictions
of the rudimentary road and trail networks in southern North Vietnam and
Taos will be extremely difficult and probably impossible to obtain in
1966, given the conventional ordnance and strike capabilities likely

to exist." Though arguing that more payoff could result from regarding
North Vietnam as a "logistic funnel" and attempting to stop what went
into it rather than what came out, it conceded that the "flow of military
logistics supplies from the USSR and China cannot be cut off." But the
report contended that such measures as mining harbors, maintaining steady
pressure on LOC's with China, and destroying militarily insignificant

but “highly prized" industrial plants would not only reduce North Vietnam's
capacity to support the insurgency in the South but would influence her
leaders' willingness to continue doing so. "Fundamental changes must be
made if the effectiveness of the campaign is to be raised significantly,"
said the report, "First, the constraints upon the air attack must be
reduced. Secondly, target selection must be placed on a more rational
basis militarily." One point stressed was the importance of taking out
all remaining POL storage facilities simultaneously and at an early date. 79/

With memoranda from the JCS now reinforced by this CIA
report, Secretary McNamara had to reconsider the POL issue. Conferring
with Wheeler on 23 March, he put several specific questions, among them
whether destruction of POL storage facilities would produce significant
results if not coupled with mining of North Vietnamese ports, what exact
targets were to be hit, and with how many sorties. 80/ Responding with
the requested details, the Chiefs said that they attached the highest
importance to the operation, even if enemy harbors remained open. They
strongly recommended, in addition, attacks on adjoining industrial targets
and LOC's, in order to enhance the effect of destroying POL facilities. 81/

In a memorandum for the President on bombing operations for
April, McNamara endorsed most of these JCS recommendations. He proposed
authorizing attacks on seven of the nine POL storage facilities in the
Hanoi-Haiphong area. Of the two he omitted, one lay near the center of
Hanoi. In addition, McNamara recommended attacks on the Haiphong cement
plant and on roads, bridges, and railroads connecting Haiphong and Hanoi
and leading from the two cities to the Chinese border, and asked that the
military commenders be permitted to run up to 900 sorties into the north-
east quadrant, at their discretion.

For this marked stepping-up of the air war, McNamara put
on paper 4 much more forceful presentation than that in his January
memorandum. Using as @ point of departure the general estimate that
pombing could neither interdict supply of the South nor halt flow from

China and Russia into the North, he argued that:

87 | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
