Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ec. Plan Three - One and 3/9 Marine Division/Wing Team."

Moreover, these forces were at various levels of readiness and a high
percentage of their personnel were Vietnam returnees or close to the
end of the obligated active service. The capability of these uncom-
mitted general purpose forces was further constrained, the Joint Chiefs
pointed out, by shortages of critical skilled specialists and shortages
in mission essential items of equipment and materiel. Thus, the Joint
Chiefs emphasized, our posture of readily available combat forces was
seriously strained. Any decision to deploy emergency augmentation
forces should be accompanied by the recall of at least an equivalent
number, or more prudently, additional Reserve component forces and

an extension of terms of service for active duty personnel. Indeed,
the Chiefs, warned,

"Tt is not clear at this time whether the enemy will be able
to mount and sustain a second series of major attacks throughout
the country. It is equally unclear as to how well the Vietnamese
Armed Forces would be able to stand up against such a series of
attacks if they were to occur, In the face of these uncertainties,
a more precise assessment of USMACV's additional force requirements,
if any, must await further developments. The Joint Chiefs of
Staff do not exclude the possibility that additional develop-
ments could make further deployments necessary.”

Based on this assessment of the situation, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff concluded and recommended that:
"a. A decision to deploy reinforcements to Vietnam be
deferred at this time.

"b, Measures be taken now to prepare the 82nd Airborne
Division and 6/9 Marine Division/Wing team for possible deploy-
ment to Vietnam.

"oa. As a matter of prudence, call certain additional
Reserve units to active duty now. Deployment of emergency
reinforcements to Vietnam should not be made without concomitant
Callup of Reserves sufficient at least to replace those deployed
and provide for the increased sustaining base requirements of all
Services. In addition, bring selected Reserve force units to
full strength and an increased state of combat readiness,

"q, Legislation be sought now to (1) provide authority to
call individual Reservists to active duty; (2) extend past
30 June 1968 the existing authority to call Reserve units to
active duty; and (3) extend terms of service for active duty
personnel.

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive |
