Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Hes Sanctuaries Revisited: Renewed and Heightened Concern About
Ig0s ard Cambodia

As the ground war pursued the path just described, concern about
the infiltration and the importance of the sanctuaries deepened. On
18 January CINCPAC had come into the JCS with a request to expand the
bombing in NVN to twenty-five "remunerative targets" to counter infil-
tration. 32/ This request was followed on 25 January by a detailed
cable addressing the broader range of anti-infiltration measures. After
pleading for a more "balanced" program, the message turned to a major
recommendation:

",.-The enemy's capability to supply his forces in
SVN has been degraded by our air interdiction campaign in
SVN, Laos and NVN, and by our offensive ground operations
in SVN. The confusion of his supply situation may account,
in part, for his attempts to avoid significant contact with
our forces. The enemy is dependent upon external sources
for most of his weapons, ammunition, medical supplies and
assorted technical equipment. The closing of Haiphong would
disrupt the enemy's logistical capability to supply these
items to SVN. Therefore, I recommend and will shortly sub-
mit a plan for closing the port of Haiphong, and other minor
ports in NVN. Closing these ports would be the single most
effective and economical method of drastically reducing the
enemy's capability to carry on the war in SVN. The military
edvamtages iof.thin.caction arould-be.manifold.: Tt would stil
be necessary, however, to recognize the significance of
infiltration throughout Cambodia, The more successful our
operations in NVN and Laos become, the more commumist pressure
will be brought to bear on Cambodia. to increase use of her
ports and LOC's or infiltration of supplies into SVN.

"Measures to improve the counter infiltration aspects
of our current programs are aimed at striking at the enemy's
vulnerabilities and countering his strength. These include:
"A. Destroying his military and logistics bases.
B. Interdicting his LOC's.
. Foreing the enemy into sustained combat operations.
D. Providing security for the SVN population to prevent

impressment and to assist their economic, social, and polit-
ical development."

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
