Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Principals by Deputy Secretary Vance and was approved by them with one
exception. They smended the ordnance instructions which had been pre-
pared for CINCPAC to specifically exclude the use of napalm. For its
first use against targets in Laos, they felt, the RLAF would be the
only appropriate user. McGeorge Bundy stated that the amended proprem
"fulfilled precisely the President's wishes," and that he (Bundy) would
so inform the President. He further stated that, barring separate ad-
vice to the contrary, the program should be executed. It was also
agreed at this meeting that there would be no public statements about
armed reconnaissance operations in Laos unless a plane were lost. In
such an event, the Principals stated, the Government should continue to
insist that we were merely escorting reconnaissance flights as requested
by the Laotian Government, 175/

Armed reconnaissance operations in Laos, called BARREL ROLL,
got underway on 14 December, This first mission was flown by USAF jet
aircraft along Route 8. It was followed on the 17th by carrier~based
A-l and jet aircraft, striking along Routes 121 and 12. On the 18th,
this pattern of two missions by four aircraft each was determined by
Secretary of Defense or higher authority to be the weekly standard --
at least through the third week. 176/ Just a day earlier, the JCS had
proposed @ second week's program that included repetition of the first
week's operations plus missions along Route 7, 9 and 23. Their proposals
were prepared with a statement of JCS understanding "that a gradual
increase in intensity of operations is intended for the second week."
Recalling Souvanna Phouma's reported reauests for such operations, they
also included a strong recommendation that Route 7 be struck as part of
the second week's missions. 177/

This same rationale was voiced by General Johnson in the Prin-
cipals meeting on 19 December. He pointed out that the BARREL ROLL
progrem briefed there by Deputy Secretary Vance did not represent any
intensification beyond the previous week's effort. Vance confirmed that
not intensifying the program had been one of the criteria applied in
selecting the second week's missions. Consensus was reached by the
Principals that the program should remain about the same for the next
two weeks, in accordance with the most recent guidance. 178/

At the end of December, when there was serious question about
the efficacy of maintaining the direction of U.S. policy in South Vietnan,
Defense officials requested an evaluation of the BARREL ROLL program.

In perticular, they were concerned as to "why neither the DRV nor the
Communist Chinese have made any public mention of or appeared to have
taken cognizanc of our BARREL ROLL operations.” 179/ In response. a
DIA assessment indicated that the Communists apparently had made no
"distinction between BARREI, ROLL missions on the one hand and the

Laotian T-28 strikes and YANKEE TEAM missions on the other." Attributing
all stepped up operations in Laos to the United States and its "lackeys,”
they hed lumped all operations together as "U.S. armed interference in

*

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
