Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

They further believe that the Chinese communists would be reluc-
tant to become directly involved in the fighting in Southeast
Asia; however, as the number and severity of US attacks against
the DRV increase, they probably would feel an increased compul-
sion to take some dramatic action to counter the impact of US
pressures. There is a fair chance that Peiping would introduce
limited numbers of Chinese ground forces as "volunteers" into
North Vietnam, and/or northern Laos, intending to raise the

- spector of further escalation, to underline its commitment to
assist the North Vietnamese, and to challenge the Soviets to -
extend corresponding support. They also’ believe that the probable
Soviet response to these US courses of action would consist both
of a vigorous diplomatic and propaganda effort to bring the United
States to the conference table and the provision of military sup-
port to North Vietnam. While the extent and nature of the latter
are difficult to predict, it almost certainly would include anti-
aircraft artillery and radars. In order to provide a more effec-
tive defense against the US air attacks, North Vietnam would
probably press for surface-to-air missiles. The chances are about
even that the Soviets would agree to provide some SA-2 defenses,
but they would do so in ways calculated to minimize the initial
risks to them. By providing the necessary Soviet personnel in
the guise of 'technicians,' the USSR could preserve the option of
ignoring any Soviet casualties. In the event the DRV and Com-
munist Chinese openly undertake aggressive actions, the United
States and its allies can deal with them adequately....

It is the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the
program herein proposed will demonstrate to the DRV that con-
tinuation of its direction and support of insurgencies will lead
progressively to more serious punishment. If the insurgency con-
tinves with active DRV support, strikes egainst the DRV will be

’ extended with intensified efforts against targets north of the
19th parallel.

While the Joint Chiefs recommended approval of the recommendetions,
not all considered them adequate. General McConnell, Air Force Chief of
Staff, believed that the much heavier air strike recommendations, made by
the JCS in late 1964 were more appropriate then the mild actions now
proposed. 60/ General Wheeler backed deployment of more USAF and other
air units ‘but pressed for an integrated air program against the North's
transportation system, especially railroads. He also believed, along
with General Harold K. Johnson, Army Chief of Staff, that three U.S.
ground divisions might have to be sent to Southeast Asia. The JCS
chairman directed the Joint Staff to examine the possibility of placing
one or two of these divisions in northeast Thailand and a third, aug-
mented by allied personnel, south of the demilitarized zone in South
Vietnam.

tT

h6 - TOP SECRET - Sensitive
