Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

concluded, outside of restricted circle designated when Project
begun. Despite disappointing response, we wish to keep open
channel with Soviets on this subject and we hope eventually with
DRV via Soviets. We feel that use of this channel another time
might be precluded if we appear to have carried through Project
MAYFLOWER solely for credit it might earn us with third parties
and public opinion in general. Therefore we would not now wish
inform NATO Council and 17 Non-aligned countries.

Only British, Canadians, Australians, UN Secretary General
and Korean President Park (here on state visit) were in fact
informed in advance of resumption bombing and also of negative
outeome of soundings of other side.

In addition to this limited circle of allied intimates, a larger
circle of friendly governments was. provided with Ambassadorial brief-
ings on the bombing pause after the resumption. An instruction to this
effect went out to Americen ambassadors in New Delhi, Tokyo, Bangkok,
Vientiane, Manila, Wellington, and Paris: 1yh/

You should take first opportunity see Pri. Minister,
Fon Min, or other avpropriate high level official to inform
him that the U.S. and South Vietnamese Governments suspended
bombing against North Viet-Nam for a period of five days
which ended on Mey 18. The initiation of this pause in
bombing was accompanied by an approach by us to the Govern-
ments of the Soviet Union and North Viet-Nam which took note
of repeated calls from that side for cessation of bombing -
and their statements that discussions could not take place
while bombing continued. Unfortunately the reception of our’
approach was not merely negative but hostile...In view of the
complete absence of any constructive response, We have
decided the bombing must be resumed. Nevertheless we do not
exclude possibility of other such attempts in the future.

You should add that the record of the past severel weeks
is discouraging in that Communists and particularly Peking
appear intent on rejecting every effort from whatever quarter
to open up contacts and conversations which might lead to a

. resolution of the Viet-Nam situation. The rejection of Presi-
dent Johnson's April 7 proposals for unconditional discussions,
of the appeal of the Seventeen Non-aligned countries and of
President Radhekrishnan's proposal all illustrete the point
together with Peking and Hanoi's obvious efforts to obstruct
the convening of @ conference on Cambodia. We will neverthe-

i less continue to explore a11 possibilities for constructive
discussion, meanwhile maintaining with the Government of
South Viet-Nem our joint military efforts to nreserve that
country's .freedom.

127 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
