Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 2011

“TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to describe his strategy for the period from 1 May to November 1966.
This SW monsoon season had been spent seeking to:

++-contain the enemy through offensive tactical operations
(referred to as "spoiling attacks" because they catch the
enemy in the preparation phases of his own offensive), force
him to fight under conditions of our choosing, and deny him
attainment of his own tactical objectives. At the same time,
we had utilized all forces that could be made available for
area-and population security in support of RD...the threat of
enemy main forces has been of such magnitude that fewer
friendly forces devoted to general area security and support
of RD envisualized at the time our plans were prepared for the
period. 13/

General Westmoreland visualized his strategy for the period 1 November
1966 to 1 May 1967 -- the NE monsoon season -- as being one of maintain-
ing and increasing the momentum of operations. The strategy would be
one oF

*e-& general offensive with maximum tactical support to area

and population security in further support of RD. The essen-
tial tasks of RD in nation building cannot be accomplished if
enenly main forces can gain access to population centers and
destroy our efforts. US/FW forces, with their mobility and
coordination with RVNAT,must take the fight to the enemy by
attacking his main forces and invading his base areas. Our
ability to do this is improving steadily...The growing strength
of US/FW forces will provide the shield that will permit ARVN
to shift its weight of effort to an extent not heretofore feasi-
ble, to direct support of RD. Also, I visualize that a signi-
ficant number of the US/FW maneuver battalions will be committed
to tactical areas of responsibility (TAOR) missions. These
missions encompass base security and at the same time support

RD by spreading security radially fron the bases to protect more
of the population...At the same time, ARVN troops will be avail-
able if required to reinforce offensive operations and to serve
as reaction forces for outlying security posts and government
centers under attack...The priority effort of ARVN forces will
be in direct support of the RD program. Jn many instances,
province chiefs will exercise operational control over these
units. This fact notwithstanding, the ARVN division structure
must be maintained and it is essential that the division com-
mander enthusiastically support RD. Our highly capable US
division commanders who are closely associated with correspond-
ing ARVN commanders are in a position to influence them to do
what is required. We intend to employ all forces to get the
best results measured, among other things, in terms of population

59 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
