Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnam to continue an unobstructed importation of war
material. Further, it is believed that such a drastic
reduction in the scale of air operations against North
Vietnam could only result in the strengthening of the
enemy's resOlve to continue the war. No doubt the reduc-
tion in scope of air operations would also be considered
by many as a weakening of US determination and a North
Vietnamese victory in the air war over northern North
Vietnam. The combination of reduced military pressures
against North Vietnam with stringent limitations of our
operations in South Vietnam, as suggested in Course B,
appears even more questionable conceptually. It would
most likely strengthen the enemy's ultimate hope of
victory and lead to a redoubling of his efforts. 122/

Completing their rejection of the DPM's analysis, the
Chiefs argued that properly explained a mobilization of the reserves and
a full U.S, commitment to winning the war would be supported by the
American publie and would bolster not harm U.S. prestige abroad. The
Chiefs did not think the likelihood of a Chinese intervention in response
to their proposed actions was high and they completely discounted a
Soviet entry into the hostilities in any active role. Summing up their
alarm at the complete turnabout in U.S. policy suggested by the DPM, the
Chiefs stated:

Most of the foregoing divergencies between the DPM
and the stated policies, objectives, and concepts are
individually important and are reason for concern. How-
ever, when viewed collectively, an alarming pattern
emerges which suggests a major realignment of US objec-
tives and intentions in Southeast Asia without regard
for the long-term consequences. The Joint Chiefs of Staff
are not aware of any decision to retract the policies and
objectives which have been affirmed by responsible officials
many times in recent years. Thus, the DPM lacks adeqaute
foundation for further consideration. 123/

With the expectation that the implementation of course B would result

in a prolongation of the war, @ reinforcing of Hanoi's belief in ultimate
victory, and greatly increased costs for the U.S. in lives and treasure,
the Chiefs recommended that:

a. The DPM NOT be forwarded to the President.

b. The US national objective as expressed in NSAM 288
be maintained, and the national policy and objectives for
Vietnam as publicly stated by US officials be reaffirmed.

57 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
