Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is hoped that June will see a modification to
the RT /ROLLING THUNDER/ rules with authorization to
syrike /sic/ key POL targets, selected targets in the
Hon Gai and Cam Pha compleses /sic/, and relaxation of
the restrictions against coastal armed recce in the NE.
In addition, reduction in the size of the Hanoi/Haiphong
restricted areas would be helpful.... 166/

The CIA, however, remained skeptical of these expectations for strikes
against POL. On June 8, they produced a special assessment of the likely
effects of such an attack, probably in response to a request from the
Principals for 3, last minute evaluation. The report emphasized that
"neutralization" of POL would not in itself stop North Vietnamese support
of the war, although it would have an adverse general effect on the

economy.

It is estimated that the neutralization of the bulk
petroleum storage facilities in NVN will not in itself
preclude Hanoi's continued support of essential war activi-
ties. The immediate impact in NVN will be felt in the need
to convert to an alternative system of supply and distribu-
tion. The conversion program will be costly and create
additional burdens for the regime. It is estimated, how-
ever, that the infiltration of men and supplies into SVN
can be sustained. The impact on normal economic activity,
however, would be more severe. New strains on an already
burdened economic control structure and managerial talent
would cause reductions in economic activity, compound
existing distribution problems, and further strain man-
power resources. The attacks on petroleum storage facili-
ties in conjunction with continued attacks on transportation
targets and armed reconnaissance against lines of communica-
tions will increase the burden and costs of supporting the
war. 167/

The sequence of events in the POL scenario drawn up by McNaughton
was interrupted on June 7 by yet another international diplomatic effort
to get negotiations started, or at least to test Hanoi's attitudes toward
such a possibility. Canadian Ambassador Chester Ronning had been planning
a second visit to Hanoi for June 14-18 with State Department approval.
Thus, when Rusk, who was travelling in Europe, learned on June 7 of the
possibility of strikes before Ronning's trin, he urgently cabled the
President to defer them.

-»eRegarding special operation in Vietnam we have had
under consideration, I sincerely hope that timing can be
postponed until my return. A major question in my mind is
Ronning mission to Hanoi occurring June 14 through 18. This

*

123 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
