t#/.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the pressure approach in the CIP negotiations; the "get on his wave length"
approach following the Task Force review -- and both produced an identical
lack of results.

Second, Galbraith's analysis of the situation really has a good deal
in common with that of the Taylor Mission. Obviously, he thought we must
be rid of Diem, and he apparently thought it was a mistake to put this
move off by making new aid offers to Diem rather than letting word get
around that we would be prepared to offer more support to Vietnam if Diem
should be removed. But at this time, even people like Galbraith (and
Schelsinger, as is clear from his memoir) saw no alternative to continuing
to support Vietnam, although not to continuing to support Diem personally.
Galbraith was, if anything, more optimistic about the chances of putting
down the insurgency (given a change in Saigon) than was the Taylor Report.
For his optimism was not at all contingent on any hopes of the efficacy
of bombing threats against the north. For all we know, he may have been
right in supposing any "moderately effective” Saigon government could do
all right against the insurgents; but we now know all too well how over-
optimistic was his fairly confident expectation that a military replace-
ment of the Diem regime would be at least moderately effective.

To return to the negotiations in Saigon, in late November, we now had
the following situation:

1. It was clear that Diem was, to say the least, disappointed
with the bargain Kennedy had proposed.

2. Kennedy was obviously aware that he had offered Diem less
than Diem expected, and demanded much more in return.

3. Both supporters of Diem, like Lansdale and Kenneth Young,
and his severest critics, like Galbraith, were agreed that it was futile
to try to force Diem to reform. Kennedy had already had his own experi-
ences with such efforts earlier in the year.

4, Presumably, although we have nothing to show it in the avail-
able record, there was some unrest within the Administration about the
limited offer that was being made, the demands being pressed, and the
delay it was all causing. To put off an agreement too long raised the
dual threat of an awkward public squabble and renewed pressure on the
President to send the task force after all,

It is hard to think of any realistic counter-arguments to the case for
settling the dispute and get on with either trying to do better in the
war, or get rid of Diem.

The next phase was a brief flurry of anti-American stories in the
government-controlled Saigon press, The U.S. was accused, among other

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

146
