Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Then, in @ significant passage, the reply from the field asked in blunt
language just what the intended purpose was for the proposed expansion

of the advisory effort. ‘The "White Star Teams" used in Laos, the message
noted, had the purpose and effect of establishing U.S. control over foreign
forces:

The question arises as to whether you mean encadrement or
inerease of "advisory" effort. Do you want to take control
or improve the performance of CG and SDC by step-up within
eurrent policy? 106/

Although this direct question was never answered, the JCS’ initial
proposal for encadrement was quietly dropped. ‘The U.S. might wish to be
in a position to control élements or all of RVNAF but it would not con-
sciously follow any scheme explicitly aimed at such control. Instead,
the JCS countered with a plan for six Mobile Training Teams in each
province backed up by a Training Center Team and & small Provincial Training
Detachment. ‘This proposal would put an additional 70 U.S. training advisors
in each selected province in an effort to improve the llevel. of effective-
ness of the paramilitary forces. Its recommendation was that the U.S.
military advisory effort should be increased by 1000 personnel, enough to
provide this new dimension of advice in the fourteen eritical provinces
which had experienced so much recent instability. 107

This JCS proposal for Mobile Training Teams for the RVNAF paramilitary
forces was tied to an explicit statement of how best to organize this
effort without any mention of how much influence or leverage the U.S. would
or could exert through this expanded system. ‘The problem was treated as
one in the development of technical proficiency; the issue of the extent
of U.S. control was largely ignored--though surely not forgotten:

Concept of US Advisory Effort

@. General

(1) An underlying principle in the oil-spot concept
is accordance of maximum flexibility to province officials in
solving individual province problems which vary widely from
province to province. This study recognizes that principle
and outlines a plan for assignment of additional US instructor
and training resources to the province to provide the training
and advice needed to improve the effectiveness of the provincial
paremilitary forces.

(2) The shortage of trained personel is acute in the
paramilitary forces because of the nature of the forces themselves.
They are recruited at province or district level to perform mili-
tary tasks in those same regions. While the 0G and SDC are con-
sidered full-time troops, many of the individuals, in fact, must
combine earning their livelihood with military duties. Movement
of these people long distances away from their homes to training
centers disrupts their lives, creates morale problems, and

45 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
