Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

11 independent Infantry Regiments, 5 Security Regiments, plus
combat support and service support units. In addition, there
are para-military forces estimated to number up to approximately
235,000 personnel, which are organized 4s two separate forces,
-the Provincial Forces and the Armed Militia..--

"(2) Capabilities:...Although it is highly probable that
some advance indication or warning will be received, an attack
on South Vietnam by Viet Cong forces could occur without warning
at any time. With or without warning, it must be realized that
the initiative, at least during the initial stages of @ war,
will rest with the Viet Cong. Accordingly, it must be assumed
that the enemy will be able to provide for the necessary build-up
of his forces, execute planned deployments and launch his attack
at selected points at his own time and convenience....1n con-
junction with the conduct of operations by military forces, the
Viet Cong will employ to the maximum guerrilla forces and sub-
versive/dissident elements already in place in South Vietnam.

The strength of these elements is currently estimated at approxi-
mately 2000 personnel, a majority of whom are armed. It can be
expected that the Viet Cong will make every effort to reinforce
these elements prior to and during the snitiation of hostilities
in order to enhance their capability for the conduct of guerrilla
warfare, create internal disorder, and execute sabotage and
conduct attacks on pre-selected critical targets within South
Vietnam for the primary purpose of impeding or interfering with
operations being undertaken by South Vietnam armed forces...-

"(3) Possible Courses of Action:

"(a) Continuation of Viet Cong attempts to gain con-
trol of South Vietnam through a combination of diplomatic,
economic, political and subversive means.

"(b) Overt use of military force against neighboring
states is most likely to be undertaken unilaterally by the
Viet Cong, but would be most likely a part of an all-out Com-
munist effort to take all of Southeast Asia.”

Washington estimates were, however, beginning to reflect
concern over Diem's political solvency. For example, an Operations Co-
ordinating Board Progress Report on U.S. policy in mainland Southeast
Asia, dated May 28, 1958, drew attention both to an increase in communist
subversive and terrorist pressures against the Diem regime, and to aspects
in Diem's political style that could limit the ability of his regime to
cope with those pressures:

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
19
