Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Moreover, we are in Viet-Nem to fulfill one of the most solemn
pledges of the American nation. Three Presidents-~President Eisenhower,
President Kennedy, and your present President--over 11 years have com-
mitted themselves and have promised to help defend this small and valiant
nation.

"Strengthened by that promise, the people of South Viet-Nem have
fought for many long years. Thousands of them have died. Thousands
more have been crippled and scarred by war. We just cannot now dis-
honor our word, or abandon our commitment, or leave those who believed
us and who trusted us to the terror and repression and murder that would
follow. tu

"This, then, my fellow Americans, is why we are in Viet-Nam.”

Tage Sought Ras

36. Statement by Secretary of Defense, Robert S. McNamara, Before the
Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations of the Senate
Committee on Appropriations on August I, 1965, "Buildup of U.S.

Department of State Bulletin, August 30, 1965,

Forces in Viet-lian,” Department of State Bulletin, August 30, 1:
ee fe a ge oe ee
x *:. *

"The issue in Viet-Nam is essentially the same as it was in 1954
when President Eisenhower said:

‘I think it is no longer necessary to enter into a long
argunent or exposition to show the importance to the United States of
Indochina and of the struggle going on there. No matter how the strug-
gle may have started, it has long since become one of the testing places
between: a free form of government and dictatorship. Its outcome is
going to have the greatest significance for us, and possibly for a long
time into the future.

"We have here a sort of cork in the bottle, the bottle being
the great area that includes Indonesia, Burma, Thailand, all of the sur-
rounding areas of Asia with its hundreds of millions of people....'

"What is at stake there is the ability of the free world to block
Communist armed aggression and prevent the lors of all of Southeast Asia,
a loss which in its ultimate consequences could drastically alter the
strategic situation in Asia and the Pacific to the grave detriment of
our own security and that of our allies....

"The struggle there has enormous implications for the security of
the United States and the free world and, for thet metter, the Soviet

D-51
