Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

a)

' A
Anat tie AF” An
rd ° oF aaa
feu , f

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

On October 2, the day the McNamara-Taylor mission reported to the
President, General Don “accidentally” encountered Lt Colonel Conein,
the CIA contact man in the August plot, at Tan Son Nhut airport and
asked him to meet him that night in Nha Trang. 28/ Truehart approved
the contact, instructing Conein to neither encourage nor discourage a
coup but only to get information. At the meeting, General Don said that
General Minh wanted to meet with Conein at 8:00 a.m. on October 5 at
JGS headquerters at which time Minh would be able to go into the details
of the generals' plan. Don emphatically stated that there was a plan,
and that essential to it was the conversion of General Dinh, III Corps
commander, to the cause.

So, with Lodge's approval, Conein met General Minh on October 5.
Getting straight to the point, "General Minh stated that he must know
American Government's position with respect to a change in the Govern-
ment of Vietnam within the very near future." 29/ The government's
loss of popular support was endangering the whole war effort, which was
deteriorating rapidly. He did not expect any U.S. support, but needed
assurances the U.S, would not thwart the attempt. Also involved, he
said, were Generals Don, Khiem and Kim. Of three possible and not
mutually exclusive plans mentioned by Minh, two involved military action
against loyal units in Saigon, and one was an assassination plot against
brothers Nhu and Can, but not Diem. Conein remained noncommittal about
both U.S. support and the various plans. Minh then expressed doubt about
General Khiem whom he suspected of having played a double role in August,
but indicated that the generals would have to act soon to forestall
abortive attempts by lower echelon officers. Minh hoped to meet with
Conein in the neer future to go over the detailed plan of operations.
Conein was again noncommittal and Minh said he understood.

Lodge, with Harkins' concurrence, recommended that when Minh, about
whom he was row dubious after his August experience, approached Conein
again, he be told: (1) that the U.S. would not thwart his plans; (2) that
we would be willing to review his plans, except those for assassinations; and
(3) “that U.S. aid will be continued to Vietnam under government which
gives promise of gaining support of people and winning the war against
the Communists." 30/ In pressing Minh for details of the planned ccomposi-
tion of a successor regime, Lodge felt we should stress the need for a
"good proportion of well qualified civilian leaders in key positions." 31/

A message emanating from an NSC meeting was sent to Lodge on the
same day and appears to have been dispatched before the arrival of the CAS
report on the Conein-Minh meeting and Lodge's comment. In it the Presi-
dent specifically instructed Lodge to avoid encouraging a coup. The
message stated:

-.-President today approved recommendation that no
initiative should now be taken to give any active covert
encouragement to a coup. There should, however, be urgent
covert effort with closest security under broad guidance

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
