Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

While the martial law decree gave General Don command of all troops,
in fact, General Dinh and Colonel Tung took their orders directly from:
the palace, Thus, when the raids came, General Don was at JGS unaware.
In a long discussion on August 23 with a CAS officer, he suggested that
the martial law decree was only phase one of a larger Generals' plot. 5/
They were thrown off balance, however, by the raids and by General Dinh's
rapid assumption of local control of martial law in Saigon.

In planning the raids, Nhu had been extremely careful not to have
word leak to the U.S. mission (although the Buddhists and the U.S. press
corps had been tipped off by their own informants). On the morning
after the attack, Richardson, the CIA chief and the senior American
civilian in Saigon, emphatically denied to Halberstam any foreknowledge
of the plan. 6/ To further isolate the U.S. from an accurate assessment
during the operation, Nhu had the telephone lines to the Embassy and the
homes of all senior U.S. personnel cut shortly after the raids got under
way. t/ His efforts had the desired effect. It was several days before
the U.S. mission in Seigon and officials in Washington could piece
together what happened. In Washington, Herriman and Michael Forrestal, a
member of McGeorge Bundy's staff at the White House, drafted a stiff
public statement that was released by the State Department at 9:30 the
following morning. It deplored the raids as "a direct violation by the
Vietnamese Government of assurances that it was pursuing a policy of
reconciliation with the Buddhists." 8/ But the first U.S. intelligence
reports, based on information from Nhu, accepted army responsibility for
the raids, and treated their coincidence with the martial law decree as,
in effect, a military coup. In an August 21 memorandum for the Secretary
of Defense, the Director of DIA, General Carroll, wrote, "Although the
military moves are based on an alleged presidential proclamation, the
military leaders have, in effect, assumed full control." 9/

When the raids occurred, Lodge, Nolting, and Roger Hilsman, the
Assistant Secretary of State for the Far East, had been conferring in
Honolulu. Lodge was immediately instructed to proceed to Saigon. 10/
After a brief stop in Tokyo, Lodge touched down in Saigon at 9:30 p.m.
on August 22, in an atmosphere charged with tension and official U.S.
confusion. Awaiting him was a cable from Hilsman asking for a clarifica-
tion of the situation. Had the military taken over and retained Diem as
a figurehead; had Diem strengthened his own position by calling in the
military; or were the Nhus really calling the shots? 11/ Within twenty-
four hours, Lodge had sent a preliminary reply: there had been no coup,
but there seemed also to be no diminution in the roles of the Nhus,
although the power roles within the regime were unclear. 12/

‘That same day, the first military feelers had been put out from
the Vietnamese generals to determine what the U.S. reaction would be to
a military coup. General Don, the commander of the armed forces under
the martial law decree, had a long, rambling conversation with a CAS
officer, He first outlined the true role the army had played in the
events of August 20-21 and then inquired why the U.S. had blamed the army
for the raids on the pagodas:

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
