Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and wished he could spend his time mounting military operations and in
planning long-term strategy instead of dealing with political intrigues
and squabbles. But he had to think ebout the security of his regime.

The Secretary then referred to the Ambassador's report of Khanh's
desire not to "prolong the agony," and said that he, the Secretary, wanted
to hear more about this. Khanh said that in speaking of not wanting to
"make the agony endure" he did not mean he would lose patience, but rather
wanted to speed up the effort by something like a proclamation that South
Vietnam was being attacked from the north and was therefore being put on a
war footing. The statement would also say that if this attack from the
north did not stop within a specified period of time, South Vietnam would
strike back in ways and degrees comparable to the North Vietnamese attacks
on South Vietnam,

Whereas the north attacks us with guerrillas that squirm through
the jungle, we would attack them with guerrillas of our own, only
ours would fly at treetop level and blow up key installations or
mine the Port of Haiphong.

The Secretary asked in return if Khanh judged it wise to start opera-
tions at that time. Khanh replied that he needed first to consider the
enemy's probable reaction, including the reaction of Communist China. The
NLF and VC were only arms and hands of the monster whose head was in Hanoi
"and maybe further north." To destroy the thing it was necessary to strike
the head. ‘The purpose of going on a war footing was to prepare for ultimate
extension of the war to the north. Taylor asked how best to attack the
North. It had been noted that small-scale operations had had no success.
With respect to RVNAF capabilities, Khanh said that they either were equal
to the task already, or soon would be--the problem was to be sure of en-
joying full U.S. support. Khanh conceded that there were always unknowns
that created uncertainties. Taylor recalled that in March Khanh had favored
holding off the attack on North Vietnam until there was a stabler base in
South Vietnam. Khanh hedged on this point at first; then, after conceding
some GVN weakness, said an attack on the North was the best way to cure that
weakness. It would be a cure for wealmess to draw clear lines of battle
and thereby engage men's hearts in an all-out effort.

The Secretary at a later point reminded Khanh of the 72,000-man in-
erease in ARVN, and another 72,000-man increase in paramilitary forces,
that had been agreed upon in March; and pointed out that accomplishments
in April did not suggest that the GVN was on schedule. The Secretary ;
emphasized he made the observation only to introduce his main point, which
was that the U.S. Government would help in any way it could to get the
program back on schedule. Then he produced a chart showing what should
have been achieved and what actually had been achieved. The USG would
supply any needed funds, and fighter-type aircraft, but the GVN must em-
phasize to the provinces that program funds must be disbursed. Khanh blamed

; f TOP SECRET - Sensitive

19
