Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In the last NSC paper approved before the Indochina situation
was totally transformed by the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu and the
Geneva Conference, the "successful defense of Tonkin" was said to be the
"keystone of the defense of mainland Southeast Asia except possibly
Malaya." 16/ NSC 5405 took some, but probably not sufficient, account of
the deterioration in the French position which had occurred since NSC
124/2 was approved eighteen months earlier. It, nevertheless, repeated.
the domino principle -in detail, including the admonition that "such is the
interrelation of the countries of the area that effective counteraction
would be imnediately necessary to prevent the loss of any single country
from leading to submission to, or an alignment with, communism by the
remaining countries of Southeast Asia and Indonesia," The document also
noted that:

"In the conflict in Indochina, the Communists and.
non-Communists worlds clearly confront one another in
the field of battle. The loss of the struggle in
Indochina, in addition to its impact in Southeast Asia
and South Asia, would therefore have the most serious
repercussions on U.S. and free world interests in
Europe and elsewhere."

The subject of possible negotiations was broached in NSC 5405,
following the observation that political pressures in France may impel
the French Government to seek a negotiated rather than a military settle-
ment. It was noted (before Dien Bien Phu) that if the Navarre Plan failed
or appeared doomed to failure, the French might seek to negotiate simply
for the best possible terms, irrespective of whether these offered any
assurance of preserving a non-communist Indochina.

In this regard the NSC decided the U.S. should employ every feasi-
ble means to influence the French Government against concluding the struggle
on terms “inconsistent” with the basic U.S. objectives. The French should
be told that: (1) in the absence of a marked improvement in the military
situation, there was no basis for negotiation on acceptable terms; (2)
the U.S. would "flatly oppose any idea" of a cease-fire as a preliminary
to negotiations, because such a cease-fire would result in an irretrievable
deterioration of the Franco-Vietnamese military position in Indochina;

(3) a nominally non-commiunist coalition regime would eventually turn the
country over to Ho Chi Minh with no opportunity for the replacement of
the French by the United States or the United Kingdom. /Emphasis Addea/

7. Conclusion
In conclusion, two comments can be made:

a. With the growing perception of a Chinese threat to Indochina,
and, therefore, to all of Southeast Asia, the U.S. Government tended to
concentrate on the military rather than the political aspects of the French-
Viet Minh struggle. In consequence, American attention focused on (1)
deterring external intervention from China, and (2) assisting the French

A-51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
