Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

eeiling on men or materiel entering South Vietnam. Never-
theless, I recommend ALTERNATIVE B (which emphasizes
bombing the area between 17° and 20”) because (1) it holds
highest promise of serving a military purpose, (2) it
will cost the least in pilots' lives, and (3) it is con-
sistent with efforts to move toward negotiations.

Implicit in the recommendation is a conviction that
nothing short of toppling the Hanoi regime will pressure
North Vietnam to settle so long as they believe they have
a chance to sin the "war of attrition" in the South, a
judgment that actions sufficient to topple the Hanoi
regime will put us into war with the Soviet Union and
China, and a belief that a shift to ALTERNATIVE B can be
timed and handled in such a way as to gain politically
while not endangering the morale of our fighting men. 16)/

There is no evidence as to whether the President saw this
memo or not. If he did, any decision on bombing was probably deferred
to be made in conjunction with the decision on ground forces. More-
over, the middle of June was heavily taken up with the question of
whether or not to meet Kosygin, and once that was decided with pre-
paring for the confrontation. Therefore; no decision on bombing was
forthcoming during June. What is significant is the coalescence of
civilian opinion against the JCS recommended escalation.

7. The RT 57 Decision -- No Escalation

There is some evidence that in spite of the burden of
other problems, some attention was also being devoted to the possibility
of negotiations and U.S. positions in the event they should occur. 165
Bundy had had an extensive interview with the recently defected Charge of
the Hungarian Embassy in Washington who had confirmed that at no time
during any of the past peace efforts with the DRV had there been any
North Vietnamese softening of its position. 166/ This view of the cur-
rent situation was challenged, however, by INR in a report at mid-month.
They noted that, "Several recent indicators suggest that Hanoi may
again be actively reviewing the issue of negotiations. Some of the
indicators show possible flexibility; others show continuing hardness." 167/
In retrospect these were hardly more than straws in the wind. In early
July they would become more immediate, however, with a Canadian proposal
for redemilitarization of the DMZ and a bombing halt (see below). ‘The
June review of the situation no doubt was done with a view to determining
what possibilities might exist if the President met with Kosygin as he

eventually did.

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
