Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

problems of Vietnam, the special problems arising from the
Geneva agreement, and capable of meeting the long-range challenge
of the Communists. ..." (NIB 63.1-2-55, 26 April 1955, p- 3)

Meanwhile, it continued to appear likely that open communist
pressure would be postponed until mid-1956, but only until then. An
estimate of probable developments in North Vietnam to July 1956 con-
cluded:

" , . » The resumption of widespread guerrilla activities
appears unlikely prior to the election deadline, unless the DRV
should come to the conclusion that South Vietnam can be won
only by force. Such a conclusion would become more likely should
the Diem government persist in refusing to enter the election
discussions, should election discussions not proceed favorably
for the DRV, or should the Diem government succeed, with US
assistance, in consolidating its strength to the point of becoming
a nationalist alternative to the Ho regime. Moreover, if during
the period of this estimate little progress is made towards
relaxing tensions, Peiping and Moscow might permit the DRV
greater freedom of action. Should the DRV decide to use force
short of open invasion, it would probably attempt to undermine
the Saigon government by initiating a campaign of sabotage and
terror, seeking the formation of a new government more amenable
+o demands for a national coalition. These tactics are likely
to include the activation of DRV guerrilla units now in South
Vietnam and their reinforcement by the infiltration in small
units of regulars from the North.” (NIB 63.1-55, 19 July 1955,
fe Sto ee eee

By the fall of 1955, although Diem and his army were
still struggling with Hoa Hao and Cao Dai (having scattered the Binh
Xuyen), it seemed likely that they would prevail, and emerge with
unchallenged authority, at least for a time:

"Nevertheless, the success of Diem's efforts to establish
a viable anti-Commnist government in South Vietnam is still in
doubt. Although Dien has established control over the
apparatus of government, he has dealt only in part with such
fundamental problems as: (a) the development of an effective
administration, particularly on provincial and local levels;
(b) the institution of a popularly-sanctioned constitutional
basis for the regime; (c) the elimination of armed opposition and
the extension of government authority throughout all areas of
South Vietnam; (d) the suppression of Viet Minh military and
political capabilities remaining in South Vietnam; and (e) the
ee of the economy." (NIE 63.1-3-55, 11 October 1955,
Pp. 3

8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
