Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

peasants why they should. The idea that the peasants should
assume any responsibility for the /extra-village/ government
themselves would be so alien to their thinking as to be comic.
Educated Vietnamese are well aware of this, as many of their
actions show....

"Such political parties as existed in Vietnam before the
advent of independence were all clandestine, so that any political
experience acquired from these by the Vietnamese peasants will have
been of secret plotting for the overthrowof the Government. Since
independence, they will probably have been subjected to attempted
Communist indoctrination by the Viet Cong, but this too will have
had an anti-Government slant. Since 1954, the peasants have been
fed on a diet of puerile, and frequently offensive slogans by the
Ministry of Information. These serve, if indeed they serve any
purpose at all, to make the peasant distrust the Government of
Ngo Dinh Diem. The peasants, for all their naivete, are far from
foolish and they are not deceived by slogans alleging to be true
things which they know, from their own personal experience, to be
untrue. Any political experience among the peasantry, then, is
more likely to prove a liability than an asset to any Goverment.” 115/

Diem knew that his main political dissent was centered not among his
fellow mandarins, in his press, or among his military officers, but in
the peasantry. And the prime challenge was, as Diem saw it, communism,
precisely because it could and did afford the peasants political experi-
ence.

Communism was,from the outset of Diem's rule, his bete noire. In
1955, after the victory over the sects, and just before General John W.
O'Daniel ended his tour as Chief, MAAG Vietnam, Diem talked to the General
about Vietnam's future:

"He spoke about the decentralization of government that
he had been advised to undertake, but felt that the time was
not. yet right. He felt that, since his country was involved
in a war, warlike control was in order. He remarked that the
Vietminh propaganda line never mentioned Communism, but only
land reform....Diem wants land reform too...." 116/

In his message to the American Friends of Vietnam in June, 1956, Diem
acknowledged progress, but warned that:

"We have arrived at a critical point....We must now give
meaning to our hard sought liberty... Toattain that goal we
need technicians and machines. Our armed forces which are
considerably reduced must howeyer undertake an immense task
from the military as well as the cultural and social point of
view. It is indispensable that our army have the wherewithal
to become increasingly capable of preserving the peace which
we seek. There are an infinite number of tasks in all fields
to complete before the year's end. Economic aid can be only
effective once security has been restored...." 17/

Li? | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
