Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(8) The Great Religion of the Third Amesty (Dai Dao Tam Ky Pho Do),
a Cao-Daist sect led by Tran Quang Vinh, the principal subordi-
nate of the Cao-Daist Pope, Pham Cong Tac. The Cao-Daists had
been furnished arms by the Japanese and were used as an auxiliary
police force throughout Cochinchina. 20/

Whatever short term advantages these groups gained vis-a-vis the Vichy
French, however, collaboration with the Japanese had the longer run effect
of discrediting a significant number of Vietnamese nationalists, putting
their movements at particular disadvantage in postwar competition with

the Viet Minh, which preserved its aura of unwavering faith to resistance
against all foreign domination.

(c) Trotskyists

In Cochinchina radical communists survived, and
as the war progressed, gained a following concentrated in Saigon. In 19h4
the "October" Group announced the forming of the International Communist
League, and in March, 1945, issued a manifesto condemning the "Stalinists"
of the ICP who supported the Allies, and the "feudalist" collaborators
with the Japanese:

"The future defeat of Japanese imperialism will set the
Indochinese people on the road to national liberation. The
bourgeoisie and feudalists who cravenly serve the Japanese rulers
today, will serve equally the Allied imperialist states. The
petty-bourgeois nationalists, by their aimless policy, will _
also be incapable of leading the people towards revolutionary
victory. On the working class, which struggles independently
under the flag of the Fourth International, will be able to
accomplish the advance guard tasks of the revolution.

"The Stalinists of the Third International have already
abandoned the working class to group themselves miserably with
the ‘democratic' imperialisms. They have betrayed the peasants
and no longer speak of the agrarian question. If today they
march with foreign capitalists, in the future, they will help
the class of national exploiters to destroy the revolutionary
people in the hours to come.” 21/

The Trotskyite "Struggle" Group also re-emerged in May, 1945, to resume
its rivalry with the "October" faction, but both parties advocated world
revolution, |a worker-peasant government, arming of the people and general
expropriation of land and industry. Their principal significance was to
debilitate the ICP in Cochinchina, and to impair the effectiveness of the
Viet Minh there.

| (4) Viet Minh Operations in Vietnam

The ICP, at the heart of the Viet Minh, commumicated to
the League the lessons it had painfully learned in the uprisings of

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B-25 SSS Se
