Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to restore order in Saigon. At this time Khanh was in Dalet. Onl
September General Westmoreland went to see Khanh in Dalat to urge him
to keep ARVN on the offensive against the Viet Cong and to press on
with HOP TAC and the other pacification programs. As a guid pro quo
for this, Westmoreland revised his previous position, and promised
that U.S. advisors throughout MACV would alert Khanh to unusual troop
movements (movements which might be an indication of a coup). 125/

Meanwhile, because of this turmoil, Ambassador Taylor's trip to
Washington had been postponed until the end of the first week of
September. There was further excitement on the night of 2 Septenber,
when dissident troops, mostly aligned with Dai Viet leaders, began to
converge on the city. But some of the Colonels’ Grown got wind of
the movement and stopped the advance before midnight, stringing along
with Khanh for the time being. Meanwhile, a new group had been formed
in Hue called the People's Revolutionary Committee, which, according
to Shaplen, had "distinct tones of separatism," and was verbally
attacking the temporary government. On 4 September Khanh returned to
Saigon from his Dalat retreat, and announced a tentative formula for
new administrative machinery to take over for the next two months,
after which a new government of civilians would replace the government
of the military. Khanh was welcomed, and produced a letter, signed by
both Thich Tri Quang and Thich Tam Chau, pledging support and unity.
Reportedly this hed been paid for by a sum equalling $230,000. Deals
of this kind were by no means unknown in Vietnam. Khanh eat this time
finally got rid of Dr. Hoan, who had been plotting egainst him for a
long time, by forcing his resignation and exile to Japan. 126/ Follow-
ing this there was enovgh of a lull to permit the Ambassador to return
to Washington. He would not complete the round trip, however, before
turmoil erupted again in Saigon.

2. Policies in the Period of Turmoil

On the eve of his 6 September departure for Washington, Ambassdaor
Taylor cabled a review of the Vietnamese situation

.. At best the emerging governmental structure
Might be capable of maintaining a holding operation
against the Viet Cong. This level of effort could,
with luck and strenuous efforts, be expanded to
produce certain limited pacification successes, for
example, in the territory covered by the HOP TAC
Plan. But the willingness and ability of such a
government to exert itself or to attempt to execute
an, alloub pacification plan would be marginal. It
would probably be incapable of galvanizing the
people to the heightened levels of unity and sacri-
fice necessary to carry forward the counterinsurgency
program to final success. Instead, it would look
increasingly to the United States to take the major
responsibility for prying the VC and the North
Vietnamese off the backs of the South Vietnamese
population...In the cold light of recently acquired

99

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

.
