Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. Stabilize the ROLLING THUNDER program against the North. Attack
sorties in North Vietnam have risen from about 1,000 per month at the end of
last year to 6,000 per month in, the first quarter of this year and 12,000 per
month at present. Most of our 50 percent increase of deployed attack-capable
aircraft has been absorbed in the attacks on North Vietnam. In North Vietnam,
almost 64,000 attack sorties have been flown (about 25 percent against fixed

targets), 45 percent during the past seven months, :

Despite these efforts, it now appears that the North Vietnamese-Laotian
road network will remain adequate to meet the requirements of the Communist

forces in South Vietnam -- this is so even if its capacity could be reduced
by One-third and if combat activities were to be doubled. North Vietnam's

serious need for truexs, spare parts and petroleum probably can, despite air
attacks, be met by imports. The petroleum requirement for trucks involved in
the infiltration movement, for example, has not been enough to present sig-
nificant supply problems, and the effects of the attacks on the petroleum
distribution system, while they have not yet been fully assessed, are not
expected to cripple the flow of essential supplies. Furthermore, it is clear
that, to bomb the North sufficiently to meke a radical impact upon Hanoi's
political, economic and social structure, would require an effort which we
could make but which would not be stomached either by our own people or by
world opinion; and it would involve a serious risk of drawing us into open
war with China,

The North Vietnamese are paying ea price. They have been forced to-assign
some 300,000 personnel to the lines of communication in order to maintain the
> p

critical flow of personnel and materiel to the South. Now that the lines of
communication have been manned, however, it is doubtful that either a large
increase or decrease in our interdiction sorties would substantially change
the cost to the enemy of maintaining the roads, railroads, and waterways or
affect whether they are operational. It follows that the marginal sorties -.
probebiy the marginal 1,000 or eyen 5,000 sorties -- per month against the
lines of communicetion no longer have a significant impect on the war. (See
the attached excerpts from intelligence estimates.)

When this marginal inutility of added sorties against North Vietnam and
Igos is compared with the crew and aircraft losses implicit in the activity
(four men and aircraft and $20 million per 1,000 sorties), I recommend, as.a
minimum, against increasing the level of bombing of North Vietnam and against
increasing the intensity of operations by changing the areas or kinds of
targets struck. a/

a/ See footnote on page 82

8. TOP SECRET - Sensitive

'
