128

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

or presenting the GVN with an ultimatum. Effectively carried out, such

a clarification would broaden the range of available options for the U.S.
and place us in 4 much better position to effect desired changes. The
mechanics of his proposal called for a Presidential speech in the near
future along the lines suggested earlier that week by Walt Rostow. The
President should express satisfaction at the evolution of political events
in South Vietnam toward constitutional government and indicate "that our
capacity to assist South Vietnam is dependent on a continued desire for
our assistance and on the demonstration of unity and responsibility in
the widening circle of those who will now engage in politics in South
Vietnem." 118/ Other speeches by the Vice President and members of
Congress in the succeeding weeks might stress the contingency of our
commitment, and press stories conveying the new message could be stimu-
lated. Finally, three or four months in the future, the President would
complete this process by making our position and commitment crystal clear,
possibly in response to a planted press conference question. This public
effort would be supplemented by private diplomatic communication of the
new message to South Vietnamese leaders by the Embassy.

Carver argued that putting the U.S. in a position to
condition its commitment would considerably enhance U.S. flexibility in
an uncertain policy environment.

Once the U.S. position is clear we can then see whether
our word to the Vietnamese stimulates better and more respon-
sible political behavior. If it does, we will have improved
Option A's chances for success. If it does not, or if South
Vietnam descends into chaos and anarchy, we will have laid
the groundwork essential to the successful adoption of Option C
with minimal political cost. 119/

Questions which remained to be answered included: (1) whether to continue
with scheduled troop deployments; (2) whether to give the GVN a specific
list of actions on which we expected action and then rate their performance,
or rely on a more general evaluation; (3) whether the U.S. should continue
to probe the DRV/NLF on the possibility of negotiations; (4) whether to
encourage the GVN to make negotiation overtures to the VC.

The third paper, Politics in Vietnam: A "Worst" Outcome,
(presumably by MecNeughton) dealt with the unsavory possibility of a fall
of the current government and its replacement by a "neutralist" successor
that sought negotiations, a ceasefire, and a coalition with the VC. After
considering a variety of possible, although equally unpromising, courses
of action, the paper argued that in such a case the U.S, would have "little
choice but to get out of Vietnam....Governing objectives should be:
minimizing the inevitable loss of face and protecting U.S. forces, allied
forces, and those South Vietnamese who appeal to us for political refuge." 120/
An intriguing tab to the same paper considered the impact on the U.S. posi-
tion in the Pacific and East Asia in the event of a withdrawal from Vietnam.

105 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
