Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREI - Sensitive

-position....If you think this might be a possible solution, I think
I might be able to orient myself towards it if you say so. Itwould
have advantage of avoiding all further reproach to France of
"colonialism" while at same time giving response to Diem's request
that France should go. Since it contemplates the liquidation of
the situation and the repatriation of the FEC, would the United
States be disposed to help protect French civilians and the

refugees? 139/

Secretary Dulles repeated his awareness of Diem's weaknesses
but did not agree with Faure's opinion. Diem "showed so much ability that
US fails to see how he can be got rid of now...Diem is stronger now than
when Bao Dai first withdrew his powers." Dulles said the worst aspect of
the problem was the differences between France and the US: "Vietnam is not
worth quarrel with France.” Then he matched Faure's offer by saying the US
would withdraw from Vietnam if that would solve the problem.

Choice open to us is to have Diem supported or to withdrawee.
US interest in Vietnam is simply to withhold area from com-
munists. US will give consideration to any suggestion French
make but must warn that US financial support may not be ex-
pected to any solution which (Dulles) can think of as alterna-
tive to Diem. 140/

Foreign Secretary MacMillan, calling British interests
"more indirect but nonetheless vital because (1) interest in area itself
and (2) interest in Communist threat from any area in world,” made the ob-
vious statement that a decision on Vietnam was too grave to be taken that
evening. Faure and Dulles agreed. 141/

d. Dulles: Continue with Diem - but Independently of France

By May 11, when the three ministers reconvened, Dulles had
received counsel from the JCS and General Collins. As was their wont, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff offered no opinion about whether Diem should or should
not be continued (a matter for "resolution at the governmental level") but
then stated his government showed the "greatest promise of achieving the
internal stability essential for the future security of Vietnam." Address-
_ing the military aspects of the problem, the Chiefs found neither withdrawal

of the French Expeditionary Corps nor withdrawal of US military support
acceptable. The Vietnamese National Army was considered incapable of main-
taining internal security, even less able to resist outside aggression with-
out outside military assistance. The US was barred by Geneva from increas-
ing its forces either to defend Vietnam or to defend French civilians, other
foreign nationals or refugees. Thus, although withdrawal of the French
Expeditionary Corps is ‘ultimately to be desired,’ precipitate withdrawal at
this time was not: it would “result in an increasingly unstable and pre-
carious situation" and the eventual fall of South Vietnam to communism.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
36.
