Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the policy of the United States to continue to exert maximum
efforts to obtain agreements to provide the United Nations with
armed forces as contemplated in the Charter and agreements to
achieve universal control of weapons of mass destruction and
universal regulation and reduction of armaments, including armed

.., forces, under adequate safeguards to protect complying nations
against violation and evasion.

"The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the cre-
ation by the free countries and the free peoples of the Far Fast
of @ joint organization, consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations, to establish a program of self-help and mutual
cooperation designed to develop their economic and social well-
being, to safeguard basic rights and liberties and to protect
their security and independence.

"The Congress recognizes that economic recovery is essen-
tial to international peace and security and must be given clear
priority. The Congress also recognizes that the increased con-
fidence of free peoples in their ability to resist direct or
indirect aggression and to maintain internal security will ad-
vance such recovery and support political stability." 13/

f. Precursor Pacts in Asia

With the Nationalist evacuation to Formosa in November, 1949,
an urgent situation developed in Asia that in ways paralleled the condi-
tions that prompted formation of NATO. The rise of Mao's Peoples Republic
of China (PRC) seemed to project the monolithic power of Soviet communism
to the eastern shores of Asia, menacing the relatively small nations along
China's periphery like the Russians threatened Western Europe. The Chi-
nese parroted the Kremlin's aggressive announcements, participated in the
assault on South Korea, and provided aid to Ho Chi Minh in Southeast Asia.

U.S. counteraction was forthcoming. By 1951, in an effort
to bolster the defensive capabilities of the area, the U.S. had become
a partner in five separate defense treaties in the region. Four bilateral
arrangements linked the U.S. with Japan, South Korea, Nationalist China,
and, the Philippines, forming an arc around the periphery of Communist China.
In addition, the ANZUS Treaty was signed in 1951, and the Five-Power Staff
Agency (composed of Australia, New Zealand, France, UK, and US) was formed
in 1953 "to facilitate coordination on problems in Southeast Asia." In
1954, John Foster Dulles recalled that:

"When I went out to the Pacific area in 1950 to begin the
negotiations which resulted in the Japanese Peace Treaty and
@ series of security treaties, the original hope had been that
we could have a fairly broad collective security arrangement.
As it happened, it was not possible to do at that time, and we
were content perforce with a series of treaties...But those
treaties themselves indicated that we did not regard them as
an end, but only as a beginning..." 1/

A-9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
