Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Although at this stage MAAG was charged solely with the task of
assisting the Vietnamese to develop a force capable of establishing
and mainteining internal security, the second mission of limited resis-
tance to an onslaught from the north was reflected in General Collins'
recommendations of 15 November. In recommending a force level of some
88,000, Generel Collins indicated his belief thet divisional combat
elements should be included in the force structure to assist the FEC
to absorb the shock of invasion if hostilities were renewed as well as,
if called upon, to reinforce the security troops in pacification activi-
ties. General Collins also contended thet to reduce the VNA by half
without at the same time providing forces organized for combat rather
than merely for security duty was certain to have a bed effect on Viet-
namese morale. 78/ ;

Accordingly, General Collins recommended that the U.S. support a
small, well-balanced force including 13 security regiments and an air-
borne RCT for internal security purposes and a three-field-division
force to delay any Communist invasion until external assistance from
the Manila powers could arrive. A small navy and air force were recon-
mended to complete the Vietnemese defense establisnment. 79/

On 17 November the JCS approved Collins' recommendations, empha-
sizing, however, that this program "does not provide eieauate security
for the Associeted States against external eggression after the with-
drawal of the French forces. With the Viet Minh increasing the size
end effectiveness of their forces and with no force in being committed
to mituel defense under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty,
the above long-range program would be insufficient to provide more then
limited initial resistence to an organized military assault by the Viet
Minh." 80,/ In his report of 20 January, Collins expanded on this recom-
mended farce structure, a structure "based on the concept thet ea rela-
tively small force, properly trained, equipped and led can perform the
above missions more effectively and at less cost than a larger force
which would be Go et gpontsonabe to the economic and manpower capacities
of the country." 81/

The-task of assuring that Vietnemese forces were properly trained,
equipped, and led fell initially to the Training Relations Instruction
Mission (TRIM), a joint U.S.-French enterprise under USMAAG Chief
O'Daniel. Although the Collins-Ely minute of understanding did not go
into effect until 12 Pees 1955, O'Daniel had begun to implement
that agreement in 1954 by orgenizing TRIM, which consisted of all French
and U.S. advisory and training versonnel as well es French cadres vith
Vietnamese units, for this purpose. 52 During 1955, TRIM occupied
itself witn orgenizing a military school system, setting up programs
for training officers and specialists in the U.S. and other countries,
and reducing the languege barrier. Much time and thought went into
planning for reorganizing and training the army on a divisional rather
then a battalion basis, but TRIM accomplished little in this area during

TOP SEGRET - Sensitive

18
