Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Mission as different viewpoints and proposals came forward. In particular,
Lodge's disagreements and disputes with General Harkins during October when
the coup plot was maturing and later were to be of considerable enbarrass-
ment to Washington when they leaked to the press. lodge had carefully
cultivated the press, and when the stories of friction appeared, it was
invariably Harkins or Richardson or someone else who was the villain.

No sooner had the McNamara-Taylor mission returned to Washington and
reported its recommendations than the generals reopened contact with the
Mission indicating that once again they were preparing to strike against
the regime. Washington's immediate reaction on October 5 was to reiterate
the decision of the NSC on the McNamara-Taylor report, i.e., no U.S, encour-
agement of a coup. lodge was instructed, however, to maintain contact with
the generals and to monitor their plans as they emerged. These periodic
contacts continued and by October 25, Lodge had come to believe that Diem
was unlikely to respond to our pressure and that we should therefore not
thwart the coup forces. Harkins disagreed, believing that we still had not
given Diem a real chance to rid himself of Nhu and that we should present
him with such an ultimatum and test his response before going ahead with
a coup. He, furthermore, had reservations about the strength of the coup
forces when compared with those likely to remain loyal to the regime. Al1
this left Washington anxious and doubtful. Lodge was cautioned to seek
fuller information on the coup plot, including a line-wp of forces and the
proposed plan of action. The U.S. could not base its policy on support for
a coup attempt that did not offer a strong prospect of success. Lodge was
counseled to consider ways of delaying or preventing the coup if he doubted
its prospects for success. By this juncture, however, Lodge felt committed
and, furthermore, felt the matter was no longer in our hands. The generals
were taking the action on their own initiative and we could only prevent
it now by denouncing them to Diem. While this debate was still going on,
the generals struck.

Shortly after Ambassador Lodge and Admiral Felt had called on Diem on
November 1, the generals made their move, culminating a summer and fall of
complex intrigue. The coup was led by General Minh, the most respected of
the senior generals, together with Generals Don, Kim and Khiem. They convoked
a meeting of all but a few senior officers at JGS headquarters at noon on
the day of the coup, announced their plans and got the support of their com-
patriots. The coup itself was executed with skill and swiftness. They
had devoted special attention to ensuring that the major potentially loyal
forces were isolated and their leaders neutralized at the outset of the opera-
tion. By the late afternoon of November 1, only the palace guard remained
to defend the two brothers. At 4:30 p.m., Diem called Lodge to ask where
the U.S. stood. Lodge was noncommital and confined himself to concern for
Diem's physical safety. The conversation ended inconclusively. The gener-
als made repeated calls to the palace offering the brothers safe conduct
out of the country if they surrendered, but the two held out hope until the
very end. Sometime that evening they secretly slipped out of the palace
through an underground escape passage and went to a hide-away in Cholon.
There they were captured the following morning after their whereabouts was
learned when the palace fell. Shortly the two brothers were murdered in the
back of an armored personnel carrier en route to JGS headquarters.

vii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
