Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

bringing in a new one to be armed and trained. Furthermore, the
Annamese had acquired Japanese arms from arcenals which had
been opened. General Gallagher-did not know whether or not Tai
Li ™ wassendine arms tothe Viet Minh.

2Depnty Director. Patre+n of Tnvestication and Siitistics. Chittese National
Cominission of Militury Affairs.

General Gallagher was asked whether the presence of French hos-
tages in the north would restrain French forces when they enter the
region. Te pointed out that only a few French civilians had been
removed by air. All the rest, besides some five theusand disarmed
French troops, were still to be removed. The Chinese cannot take
them out nor would Lu Han even permit their evacuation to the Do
Son Peninsula. Their presence had been a constant restraining in-
fluence on Sainteny. Asked whether the Annamese would let these
French be evacuated, General Gallagher replied that they would have
to if the Chinese were still there, but that these French natiouls would
bea real problem if the Chinese were moved out. The American Army
group had to exert considerable pressure on the Chinese to get them
to,give any freedem at all to French civilians in Haiphong, Hué and
other centers besides Hanoi. However, the Chinese and French alone
had arraneed for shipments of food from the south. The American
group, incidentally, had to intervene to prevent the monopoly by the
French of such food er of food distributed by the U.S. Army. The
French nationals could be evacuated from Hongai and Tourane by
the United States when the Japanese were removed if the Chinese
would concentrate them at those ports. However, General Gallagher
noted, that would place us in a position of working against the
Aniarmese,

Originally, General Gallagher explained, the French expected the
United States fo play the same role in the north that the British were
playing in the south. When they found us neutral they beeame mere
and more antagonistic and did everything pozsible to persuade United
States personnel to favor the French position. They liad no appre-
ciation of the actual help which the American group gave to the
prisoners of war and some of the civilian French in the fori of food,
medical aid, and soon. The Annamese, too, expected American help
originally, having been thoreughly indoctrinated with the Atlantic
Charter anil otlier ideological pronomicements.. Tn our neutral role
we were this a disappoiitment to both sides.

In response to a questien, General Gallagher gave his opinion
that Lu Han would be faithful to Chungking although as governor
of Yunnan he would also be influenced to maintain as fully as possible
relations between Yunnan and north Indochina which would be
profitable to him, ‘

General Gallagher said that the half dozen or so top French mili-
tary officers held by the Tapaneze had heen returned to France shortly
after Sainteny reached Hanoi. He did not know what had happened
to Decoux.”

* Vice Adin. Jenn Decous, Governor of French Indochina, became a prisoner
of wir of diguin in March ids,

Asked how Scommunist™” the Vier Minh were. General Gallagher
replied that they were smart and sucvessfully eave the impression of
not being commiumist. Rather, they eniphasized their interest in in-

CONFIDENTIAL

|
Oo?
