Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of risks and disadvantages. It reflected what was politically feasible

rather than what was desirable in relation to stated objectives. The

practical effect of this understandable -- perhaps inescapable and

inevitable -- way of deciding upon U.S. policy was to place almost complete
responsibility in the hands of the GVN for the attainment of U.S. objectives --
it being assumed that GVN's objectives were compatible with ours.

Midway through 1964 President Johnson changed the entire top level of
U.S. leadership in Saigon. General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, retired from active military duty (for the second
time) to become the U.S. Ambassador. An experienced and highly regarded
career diplomat, U. Alexis Johnson, was appointed deputy to Taylor. General
William C. Westmoreland stepped up from deputy to commander of U. S. military
forces in Vietnam. The new "first team" was not without knowledge about
Vietnam but it inescapably lacked the close personal knowledge of leading
GVN figures which only time and close association can develop. It set
about attempting to help the Khanh government to help itself.

General Khanh, in the event, proved unable to marshal SVN's resources
and to establish his regime in a position of authority adequate either to
stem or to turn the VC tide. Khanh's failure was, however, neither precipi-
tous nor easily perceivable at the time. As the U.S. entered and passed
through a Presidential campaign in which the proper policy to pursue in
Vietnam was a major issue, it sometimes appeared that the GVN was making
headway and sometimes appeared that it was not.

U.S. policy remained virtually unchanged during this period although
significant planning steps were accomplished to permit the U.S. to exercise
military pressures against NVN should it appear desirable (and politically
feasible) to do so. Thanks to such planning, the Tonkin Gulf incidents
of 2- August 196) were answered by "tit-for-tat" reprisal raids with
considerable dispatch. The cost was minimal in terms of world opinion and
communist reaction. Moreover, President Johnson used the Tonkin Gulf
incidents as the springboard to a broad endorsement by the Congress of
his leadership and relative freedom of action. When this was followed
in November by what can only be described as a smashing victory at the polls,
the President's hands were not completely untied but the bonds were figura-
tively loosened. His feasible options increased.

LIMITED ESCALATION LEADS TO OPEN-ENDED INTERVENTION

Immediately following his election, the President initiated an intense,
month-long policy review. An executive branch consensus developed for a
two phase expansion of the war. Phase I was limited to intensification
of air strikes in Isos and to covert actions in NVN. Phase II would extend
the war to a sustained, escalating air campaign against North Vietnamese
targets. The President approved Phase I for implementation in December 196)
but approved Phase II only "in principle."

The effect of this decision was to increase the expectation that the
air campaign against NVN would be undertaken if the proper time arose.

Vv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
