Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

",..In order to contribute to the security of the area
pending the further development of national forces for this
purpose, the representatives of France indicated that France
is prepared to retain forces of its Expeditionary Corps, in
agreement with the government concerned, within the limits
permitted under the Geneva Agreements, and to an extent to
be determined....The channel for French and United States
economic aid, budgetary support, and other assistance to
each of the Associated States will be direct to that state...."
On 23 October 1954, President Eisenhower, in a letter to Diem, offered
"to assist the Government of Vietnam in developing and maintaining a
strong, viable state, capable of resisting attempted subversion or
aggression through military means." 99/ Direct U.S. military assistance
to Diem began in early 1955. As mentioned above, by spring, 1956, the
French military command had been dissolved, and the Expeditionary Corps
withdrawn, so that the U.S. thereafter alone bore the principal burdens
of assisting the GVN to build its defenses.

6. U.S. Aid: MAP

U.S. policy on how RVNAF should develop vacillated accord-
ingly. Initially, we considered that the French forces and the SEATO
mantle would suffice for the purposes of shielding the GVN from external
aggression, and that as Lt. General John W. ("Iron Mike") O'Daniel,
Chief of the Military Assistance Advisory Group, put it in February,
1955: 100/

"The (Vietnamese) Army will be above all, according to
American ideas on the subject, a police force capable of
spotting Communist guerrillas and Communist efforts at infil-
tration."

The withdrawal of the French Expeditionary Corps, however, cast RVNAF

in a new role, and demanded they be prepared for conventional combat,
capable of staving off an attack from the North until U.S. and SEATO
aid could be landed. 101/ In June, 1956, in the wake of the French
withdrawal, General O'Daniel reported to the American Friends of Vietnam
that: 102/

"The Vietnamese Army is now organized into regiments and
divisions. In case of an armed attack by the Vietminh from
the North, it is capable of effecting enough delay to allow
for additional forces to be employed in time to save the
country.+.."

To this threat MAAG turned its attention from 1955 to 1960, with such

success that General O'Daniel's successor, It. General Samuel T. ("Hanging
Sam") Williams could justifiably assert (on the occasion of his retirement

26 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
