Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The events of the last twenty-four hours have produced a
practicable point of departure for this policy of reprisal,
and for the removal of U.S. dependents... They may also have
eatalyzed the formation of a new Vietnamese government. If so,
the situation may be at a turning point.

There is much that can and should be done to support and
to supplement our present effort, while adding sustained repri-
sals. But I want to stress one important general conclusion which
again is shared by all members of my party: the U.S. mission is
composed of outstanding men, and U.S. policy within Vietnam is
mainly right and well directed. None of the special solutions
or criticisms put forward with zeal by individual reformers in
government or in the press is of major importance, and many of
them are flatly wrong. No man is perfect, and not every tactical
step of recent months has been perfectly chosen, but when you i
described the Americans in Vietnam as your first team, you were
right.

After a brief description of the general situation in Vietnam as
the Bundy group found it, the memorandum explains the crucial question of
whether and to what degree a stable government is 2 necessity for the
successful prosecution. of U.S. policy in Vietnam. It is well to bear in
mind that the achievement of considerable goverment stability had been
made, in all previous "pressure guidance," a sine qua non of any transi-
tion to Phase II action against the North. And yet GVN stability con-
tinued to be a most elusive goal. Bundy now seemed to be arguing that
the U.S. may have been insisting on a more perfect government than was

really necessary, at least in the short run:

For immediate purposes -- and especially for the initia-
tion of reprisal policy, we believe that the government need
be no stronger than it is today with General Khanh as the focus
of raw power while a weak caretaker government goes through the
motions. Such a government can execute military decisions and
it can give formal political support to joint US/GVN policy.
That is about all it can do.

In the longer run, it is necessary that a government be
established which will in one way or another be able to main-
tain its political authority against all challenges over &
longer time than the governments of the last year and a half.

The composition and direction of such a government is a
most difficult problem, and we do not wholly agree with the
mission in our estimate of its nature.

The mood of the mission with respect to the prospect of
obtaining such a government is one of pessimism and frustra-
tion. This is only netural in terms of the events of the past
many weeks...

32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
