Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive A

One of Ambassador Taylor's major concerns was that, if a graduated
reprisals program were adopted, it would be necessary to begin discus-
sions with the GVN to seek agreement on mutually acceptable terms for
. the ultimate settlement of the conflict. Taylor thought of this as a

‘process of education by which he would guide the GVN towards formulat-
ing a “framework of demands to be made on the DRV as well as the general
negotiating procedures." He outlined his proposed "terms for cessation
of our reprisal attacks" as follows: 57/

A, Demands

1. DRV return to strict observance of 1954 accords
with respect SVN and the 1962 agreement with respect to Laos
-- that is, stop infiltration, and bring about a cessation of
VC armed insurgency. (With respect to Laos strictly observe
the 1962 accords with respect to Laos, including the with-
drawal of all Viet Minh forces and personnel from Laos and
recognize that the freedom of movement granted therein in Laos

‘under those accords is not subject to veto or interference by
any of the parties in Laos.)

B. In return and subject in each instance to a judgment
that DRV is complying faithfully and effectively:

1. U.S. will return to 1954 accords with respect to
military personnel in SVN and GVN would be willing to enter
into trade talks looking toward normalization of economic
relations between DRV and GVN.

2. Subject to faithful compliances by DRV with 1954
accords, U.S. and GVN would give assurances that they would not
use force or support the use of force by any other party to
upset the accords with respect to the DRV.

3. Within the framework of the 1954 accords, the GVN
would permit VC desiring to do so to return to the DRV without
their arms and would grant amnesty to those peacefully laying
down their arms and desiring to remain in SVN. ‘

C. If and when Hanoi indicates its acceptance of foregoing
conditions, careful consideration must be given to immediate
subsequent procedures which will avoid danger of: (a) becoming
involved in a cease fire vis-a-vis the DRV and/or the VC
accompanied by strung-out negotiations; (b) making conditions
so stringent as to be umvorkable from practical point of view.
Probably best procedure would be to have the GVN and DRV meet
‘in the DMZ at the military level under ICC auspices with U.S.
observers to reach agreement mechanics of carrying out under-
standing while action against the VC and DRV continues, at

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
