Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

control of the country's northern provinces. He will con-
tinue efforts to encircle cities and province capitals to
isolate and disrupt normal activities, and infiltrate them
to create chaos. He will seek maximum attrition of RVNAF
elements. Against US forces, he will emphasize attacks by
fire on airfields and installations, using assaults and
ambushes selectively. His central objective continues to
be the destruction of the Government of SVN and its armed
forces. As a minimum he hopes to seize sufficient territory
and gain control of enough people to support establishment
of the groups and committees he proposes for participation
in an NLF dominated government. 13/

General Wheeler stated that MACV believed the central thrust of U.S.
strategy must be to defeat the enemy offensive. If this were done well,
the situation overall would be greatly improved over the pre-TET condition.

While accepting the fact that its first priority must be the security
of the GVN in Saigon and in provincial capitals, MACV described its objec-
tives as:

--First, to counter the enemy offensive and to destroy
or eject the NVA invasion force in the north.

-- Second, to restore security in the cities and towns.

-- Third, to restore security in the heavily popu-
lated areas of the countryside.

-- Fourth, to regain the initiative through offensive
operations. 1/

In discussing how General Westmoreland would accomplish these objec-
tives, General Wheeler indicated the following tasks:

(1) Security of Cities and Government. MACV recog-
nizes that US forces will be required to reinforce and
support RVNAF in the security of cities, towns and govern-
ment structure. At this time, 10 US battalions are operating
in the environs of Saigon. It is clear that this task will
absorb a substantial portion of US forces,

(2) Security in the Countryside. To a large extent
the VC now control the countryside. Most of the 54 bat-
talions formerly providing security for pacification are
now defending district Or province towns. MACV estimates
that US forces will be required in a number of places to
assist and encourage the Vietnamese Army to leave the cities
and towns and reenter the country. This is especially true

in the Delta.

nen TOP SECRET - Sensitive
