Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is unlikely that the GVN will rise to the challenge.
Tt will not move toward a Government of National Union.
Current arrests of oppositionists further isolate and dis-
eredit it, and possibly foreshadow the emasculation of the
Assembly and the undoing of all promising political develop-
ments of the past year. Furthermore, it is possible that
the recent offensive was facilitated by a newly friendly
or apathetic urban environment, and a broad low-level
cooperative organization that had not existed on the same
seale before. If, in fact, the attacks reflect new VC
opportunities and capability in the cities, then the impact
of the attacks themselves, the overall military response,
and the ineffective GVN political response may still further
improve the VC cause in the cities, as well as in the country-
side. Even if the political makeup of the GVN should change
for the better, it may well be that VC penetration in the
cities has now gone or will soon go too far for real non-
communist political mobilization to develop. 48/

Based upon this bleak assessment of the future of the Government and
Army of South Vietnam, the ISA draft memorandum undertook to examine
alternative military strategies. Two such strategies were to be compared,
the current one and an alternative which emphasized population security.
(Actually, only one was analyzed in detail. ) The two strategies were to be
compared at current force levels and with added increments of 50,000,
150,000 and 200,000.

In analyzing our current strategy, the memorandum undertook a review
of how our strategy in Vietnam evolved. At the time U.S. forces were first
committed in South Vietnam in early 1965, the draft Presidential memorandum
indicated, the political situation was a desperate one. There was imminent
danger of a North Vietnamese-controlled seizure of power in SVN and the
imposition of a communist regime by force. Thus, the immediate objective
of the U.S. was a military one--to arrest this trend and to deny to the
nva/ve the seizure of political control by force.

Once U.S, forces were committed in increasingly large numbers, however,
the military and political situation began to improve significantly. By
the end of 1966, our initial military objective had been achieved--no longer
was it possible for NVN to impose its will upon SVN by force. By this time,
however, our military objectives had been expanded at the expense of our
political objectives.

In the absence of political directives limiting the goals to be
attained by U.S. military force, our objectives became:

a. To make it as difficult and costly as possible for
NVM to continue effective support of the VC and to cause NVN
to cease direction of the insurgency.

*

——

3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
