[is

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MACY Dir 10-12
28 May 1967

b. Organization for CORDS will conform generally to the schematic

ra eg

organizational diagram atiached at Annex A, allowing for differences in the
situzdons in the various revions/CTZ's, provinces and districts.

c. Additionally, in ceveloping detailed organizations and functions

at each level, force commanders/senior advisors will be guided by the fol-
lowing principles:

(1) Region/CTZ.

ae (2) The OCO regional director will be designated the ~..
Deputy for Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support to the .
force commander/senior advisor. As such, he will be charged with super~
vising the formulation and execution of ali military and civilian plans, poli-
cies and programs which support the GVN's RD program to include civic
action performed by US units.

(b) For all matters relating to RVNAF military support
for Revolutionary Development, the deputy senior advisor will operate under
the supervision of the Deputy for CORDS.

(c) The deputy OCO regional director will be designated
the Assistant Deputy for Civil Cperations and Revolutionary Development
Support or the Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS. In this capacity, he will
head an integrated civil/military staff which parallels, as appropriate, th
MACV CORDS organization, Further, he will direct heacquarters~based
RD-related and non-RD technical programs, :

(a) Except for psychological operations and intelligence,
those elements of the staffs of the force coramandcer/senior advisor and deputy
senior advisor engaged primarily in RD Support activities will be integrated
into the staff of the Assistant Deputy for Civil Operations and Revolutionary
Development Support or the Assistant Chief of Staff, CORDS. Ata later date,
after on-going studies are completed, further guidance may be issued if
needed for the integration of civil and military intelligence and psychological
warfare functions which represent special cases.

(2) Province.
(a) At province, anintegrated provincial advisory team

composed of the current OCO provincial team and MACV sector advisory
team will be organized,

78
