Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

£2.

POLICY DECISIONS

The efforts of the NSC Working Group were intended to be completed
in preparation for a major policy review late in November 1964. Plans
were made for Ambassador Taylor to return to Washington from Saigon to
join in a series of strategy meetings. The expectations were that the
meetings would result in a Presidential action order to supersede the
one issued following the high-level conference in September (NSAM 314).

Meetings with the President were scheduled for the week following
Thanksgiving, when he returned from his working holiday at the ranch.
Preliminary meetings between Ambassador Taylor and the principal officials
from agencies with national security interests in Southeast Asia were
held during the preceding weekend, 27-29 November. The whole episode
took place amid widespread speculation that a major policy change was
imminent and rumors that Taylor had returned to insist on the bombing
of infiltration targets in North Vietnam and Leos. Public and Congress-
ional speculation ran so high on the eve of the meetings that the White
House and Stete Department sought to dempen it with statements that
Taylor's reported comments "were not policy” end that his return did not
mean that " any great 3 horrendous deci sion” would re Suit. lie;

1. Reactions of Principals to Working Group Analyses

Before their meetings with Taylor and the President, the Prin-
cipals in Washington met to consider the Working Group's findings and
to assess the major issues affecting future U.S. courses of action. Just
prior to their initial gathering, on 24 November, Williem Bundy had for-
warded a list of questions and comments pertaining to the Working Group's
findings, and these served as a kind of agenda. Included were such issues
as: (1) whether the relative advantages emong the three options were
actually as evident as the group had found; (2) whether or not the papers'
assessment of U.S, stakes in Southeast Asia should be revised in the di-
rection of JCS attitudes; (3) whether the actions associated with the
various options could in fact be carried out to achieve the results ex-
pected; and (4) whether a deployment of ground forces to South Vietnam
would in fact provide any advantages. 113/ (TAB A)

a. Consensus Among NSC Officials. As the Principals meeting

opened, Secretary Rusk raised an issue that was high among Administration
concerns -- namely that the American public was worried about the chaos

in the GVN, and particularly with respect to its viability as an object
of an increased U.S. commitment. Secretary McNamara and General Wheeler
conceded the vropriety of this concern but warned that the situation in
the GV would only get worse if additional steps were not taken to reverse
present trends. Rusk then presented a question which seemed basic to the

- 38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
