Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

preconditions for United States intervention, and contended that if

Dien Bien Phu fell there was no reason that this should make it necessary
to plead for a cease-fire. 43/ The French Foreign Minister, in a letter
limited to the military consequences of United States intervention,

replied that in the opinion of French military experts "a massive inter-
vention of American aviation would still be able to save the garrison.” }/

b. Exchanges with the U.K.

In the discussions with the British, meanwhile, the United
States had tried both to induce the United Kingdom to participate in a
joint Anglo-American air and naval intervention at Dien Bien Phu and to
persuade the United Kingdom that the prompt organization of a collective
defense in Southeast Asia was necessary to bolster the French in Indo-

china. 45/

But the British indicated that they would make no commitment
to intervene militarily in Indochina and wished to postpone conversations
on collective defense arrangements until after the Geneva Conference.
Foreign Secretary Eden told Secretary Dulles on April 2h thet the British
did not want at this juncture to intervene in the Indochina War. 46/
Immediately afterward Eden returned to London for a special Cabinet meeting
on the Indochina crisis which was held on April 25. Prime Minister Churchill
reported to the House of Commons two days later that the British Government
was "not prepared to give any undertakings about United Kingdom military
action in Indochina in advance of the results of Geneva, " and had “not
entered into any new political or military commitments." 47/ Before
addressing the Commons, Churchill had rejected a plea from French Ambassador
René Massigli, made on behalf of Premier Laniel, for a statement that Great
Britain would join the United States and France in defense of Dien Bien
Phu. 48/

The United Kingdom was willing, however, to participate in
early military discussions to consider measures which might be taken in
Southeast Asia if Indochina were lost. Along these lines, Foreign
Secretary Eden and Secretary Dulles had discussed tentatively on April 22
the possibility of a secret military appraisal -- by the United States,
the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and Thailand -- of what could
be done to bolster Thailend in the event of a French collapse in Indochina.
The Foreign Secretary had returned to this proposition in another con=
versation with Secretary Dulles the next day. 4

On April 30, indicating that the British were prepared to
defend the area outside Indochina, and possibly the free part of a parti-
tioned Indochina, Eden proposed to Secretary Dulles "an immediate and
secret joint examination of the political and military problems in creating
a collective defense for Southeast Asia, namely: (a) nature and purpose;
(b) membership; (c) commitments." He added that this examination should
also cover immediate measures to strengthen Thailand. 50/

B-29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
