Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ambassador Taylor recalled that the ARVN intelligence chief had reviewed
the original MACV infiltration report and the proposed press release and
had "concurred in commending declassification." On the 16th Ambassador
Sullivan praised the Cooper report and suggested passing it to Souvanna
Phouma prior to what he hoped would be a prompt public release. 187/

At the Principals meeting these views were cited in a strong statement
by William Bundy concerning the problems of keeping the infiltration
evidence out of the press. General Johnson, Acting Chairman, JCS,
favored release as a morale boost to U.S, personnel in South Vietnam.
feGeorge Bundy end Carl Rowen (USIA) favored gradual or piecemeal release.
However, Mr. Vance repeated Secretary Mcliamara's wish to continue sup-
pression of the infiltration report -- possibly for an indefinite period.
This view finally prevailed, as the Principals agreed not to release the
Cooper report either in Saigon or Washington. Instead, they felt that
the President might disseminate some of the information through such
vehicles as his State of the Union message or in a contemplated Christmas
address to U.S. forces in Saigon. 188/ :

Following the meeting, but before receiving reports concerning
the current political upheaval in Saigon, the State Department cabled
the Administration's decision not to meke a formal GVE/US release of the
infiltration data. It gave as rationale the feeling that formal release
"could be misinterpreted and become vehicle /for/ undesireble speculation,”
and suggested alternative procedures. Stating that "general background
briefings...should continue to indicate infiltration has increased with-
out getting into specifics," -it indicated that under pressure, the Saigon
Embassy “could have one or more deep background sessions with /the/
Americen forces." The cable cautioned, however, that specific numbers
and comparisons with previous years' estimates should be avoided. These
would not be released, it was advised, until late in January after senior
Administration officials hed testified to Congress in a scheduled inquiry.
The current aim was stated "to get general picture into survey stores
such as Grose article of November 1 rather than as spot news commanding
wide attention." The cable concluded by acknowledging a "just received"
Taylor message and approving his stated judgment to proceed with periodic
background briefings in Saigon, along lines outlined above. 189/

Following the rift between the South Vietnamese military leaders
and the American Embassy, resistance to the release of infiltration data
hardened. In cables of 24 December, Ambassador Taylor was instructed to
avoid background briefings on the infiltration increases until the po-
litical situation clarified. He was counseled that release of the data
would be "unwise" unless he were to obtain evidence that the South Viet-
namese military was planning to go ahead with a unilateral release. 190/
These instructions prevailed until well into January, 1965.

d. Consultations with "Third Countries." In the days immediately

following the policy decisions of 1-3 December, several U.S. allies were
eonsulted concerning the intended U.S. approach in Southeast Asia. In

65 TOP SHCRET - Sensitive
