=~.

5

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

might even prevent an increase in large-scale Viet
Cong military activity, though they would probably not
force any significant reduction in Viet Cong terrorist
tactics of harassment and sabotage. Tuese strains,
particularly if they produced a serious check in the
development of Viet Cong capabilities for large-scale
(multi-battalion) operations might lead the Viet Cong
to consider negotiations. 1la/

There were certain reservations with respect to the above

estimate. The State and Army intelligence representatives on USIB

registered a dissent, stating that even under heavier attack the LOC
capacities in NVN and Laos were sufficient to support the war in SVN
at the scale envisaged in the estimate. They also pointed out that
it was impossible to do irreparable damage to the LOCs, that the Com-
munists had demonstrated considerable logistic resourcefulness and
considerable ability to move large amounts of war material long dis-
tances over difficult terrain by primitive means, and that in addition
it was difficult to detect, let alone stop, sea infiltration. On
balance, however, the SNIE came close to predicting that intensified
interdiction attacks would have a beneficial effect on the war in the
South.

Facing a decision with these kinds of implications, the
President wanted more information and asked McNamara to go on another
fact-gathering trip to Vietnam before submitting his final recommenda-
tions on a-course of action. In anticipation of the trip, McNaughton
prepared a memo summarizing his assessment of the problem. McNaughton
wrote that "meaningful negotiations" were unlikely until the situation
began to look gloomier for the VC, and that even with 200, 000-00, 000
U.S. troops in SVN the chances of a "win" by 1968 (i-e., in the next
25 years) were only 50-50. But he recommended that the infiltration
routes be hit hard, "at least to put a ‘ceiling’ on what can be infil-
trated;" and he recommended that the limit on targets be "just short"
of population targets, the China border, and special targets like SAM
sites which might trigger Soviet or Chinese reactions. 12/

McNamara left for Vietnam on July 14 and returned a week
later with a revised version of his July lst DPM ready to be sent to
the President as a final recommendation. The impact of the visit was
+o soften considerably the position he had apparently earlier taken.
His 20 July memorandum backed off from the 1 July recommendations --
perhaps, although it is impossible to tell from the available materials --
because of intimations that such drastic escalation would be unacceptable
to the President. Instead of mining North Vietnam's harbors as a quaran-
tine measure, the Secretary recommended it as a possible "severe reprisal
should the VC or DRV commit a particularly damaging or horrendous act"

such as “interdiction of the Saigon river." But he recommended a gradual

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
