Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRH - Sensitive

However, if it is considered that political considera-
tions are overriding, the Joint Chiefs of Staff would agree
to the assignment of a training mission to MAAG, Saigon, _
with safeguards against French interference with the U.S,
training mission. 25

With this crack in the Defense position, the OCB recommended,
and the NSC approved a limited and interim training program for Vietnam.
On 22 October a Joint State-Defense message was dispatched to Saigon
authorizing Anbassador Heath and General O'Daniel to “collaborate in
setting in motion a crash program designed to bring about an improve-
ment in the loyalty and the effectiveness of the Free Vietnamese forces," 26/
and on 26 October the Secretary of Defense, in secordance with the request
of the President, instructed the JCS to prepare a "long-range program
for the reorgenization and training of the minimum number of Free Viet-
namese forces necessary for interna] security (paragraph 10a/1. of NSC
5429/2) ." 27/ The decision, subject only to refinement, negotiation
with the French, and reexamination in the light of redevelopments, had
been taken--and had been taken largely on the basis of an opening in
the position of the Department of Defense which, far from dealing with
the specific and reasonable objections to U.S. training of Vietnamese
forces, simply avoided those objections by Sea the concession on
totally different grounds. 28/

The impact of the President's decision not to assist the French
by bombing at Dien Bien Phu and of his refusal to permit the landing of
a U.S, force in the Hanoi-Haiphong area after the fall of Dien Bien Phu
as recommended by the Chairman of the JCS also seems to have contributed

‘to this concession. As reported by James Gavin, "...there was ea com-

promise. We would not attack North Vietnam, but we would support a South
Vietnamese government that wé would provide a stable, independent govern-
ment that was representative of the people. As I said before, we saw
ourselves as the good guys. The French had let us down, but we would
continue the battle. Also, we in the Army were so relieved that we had
blocked the decision to comnit ground troops to Vietnam that we were in
no mood to quibble over the compromise." 29/

The refinement of the decision to organize and train the national
army, dealing with missions and force levels, was completed by the JCS
on 17 November 1954; in an interesting change of position (see note 28),
the Joint Chiefs asserted that "MAAG Indochina is capable of furnishing
training assistance to develop the internal security Army and Navy forces,
provided: a. A maximum portion of the MAAG military personnel is devoted
to training; and b. The cooperation and collaboration of the French MAAG
is secured." 30

Negotiations with the French were completed when the agreed
minute of understanding between General J. Lawton Collins and General

s 5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

