Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Communist said with some bitterness. "They would be interested in us
only if we served some purpose of theirs. Right now, unfortunately,
we do not seem to serve any such purpose."

"How about the French Communists?" TI asked. He snorted with
disgust. “The French Communists," he said, "are Frenchmen and coloni-
alists first and Communists after. In principle they are for us, but
in practice? Oho, that is quite another thing!" One of the top-
ranking Annamite Communists spoke contemptuously of Thorez, who in a
Paris speech has said he was in favor of the Annamites "finally arriving
at their independence." He laughed sourly. "A fine rubber phrase, is
it not? You can stretch it into any shape or any meaning. They are
the dominant party in France now. And look what Frenchmen are doing
now in Indochina." '

"From the small handful of French Communists in Indochina, the
Annamite comrades learned a remarkable lesson in their kind of politics.

There were only twenty in the French Communist group in Saigon. "Of
these only one," said my Annamite Communists companion, "only one soli-
darized with us. The rest stood aside." The French group prepared 4

document for the Indochinese Communist Party which bore the date of
September 25--two days after the French had seized power in the city.

I was able to read the document, but not to copy it, so.the notes I made
immediately afterward are not verbatim. But the substance was as
follows: It advised the Annamite Communists to be sure, before they
acted too rashly, that their struggle "meets the requirements of Soviet
policy." It warned that any "premature adventures" in Annamite inde-

" pendence might "not be in line with Soviet perspectives.” These
perspectives might well include France as a firm ally of the USSR in
Europe, in which case the Annamite independence movement would be an
embarrassment. Therefore it urged upon the Annamite comrades a policy
of "patience." It advised them in particular to wait upon the results
of the French elections, coming up the following month, in October,
when additional Communist strength might assure the Annamites a better
settlement. In the meantime it baldly proposed that an emissary be
sent not only to contact the French Communist Party but also the
Russians “in order to acquaint yourselves with the perspectives of
coming events."

This document displayed with remarkable and unusual bluntness the
Communist Party's notion of the relation between a revolutionary move-
ment and Soviet foreign policy. It apparently came as a shock to the
Annamite Communists, who were thrown into considerable confusion by it.
There was a sharp internal argument within the party which ended in a
decision to dissolve the party entirely, to cease functioning within
the Vietminh as a distinct unit but to work in it purely as individuals.
In this way the party apparently figured on avoiding any responsibility
at a time when its responsibility was the heaviest. I do not know what

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
c-12
