Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

deployment of the third of the Marine BLT's. Quat discussed the military
leadership frankly with Taylor and Westmoreland, and around the middle of
April started considering a move to clip their wings. On May 5, the AFC
obligingly dissolved itself, and seemed to give Quat a free hand. 8/

The Honolulu Conference of April 20, which rebuffed the idea of
encadrement and U.S. takeover (discussed later), approved additional de-
ployments and U.S. force to about 80,000 men and to introduce Korean and
Australian troops. After several days of hesitation, Quat approved the
increases. Pacification, under the new name "Rural Construction," still
gave no cause for rejoicing; and GVN resisted Taylor's proposal to install
some civilians as province chiefs. 9/

Analysis by members of the U.S. mission council of a RVNAF J-3
paper, "The Organization and Operations of the Pacification System," re-

vealed considerable variance between U.S. and GVN views on:
(1) he role of the corps commander in pacification.

(2) The relationship of provinces with a proposed Bureau
for Pacification Affairs.

(3) The position of Minister of Interior in pacification.

MACV forwarded requirements to increase the number of subsector advisory
teams to 180, of which 33 in particularly remote locations would be filled
initially by Special Forces teams. It was envisioned that in case of
escalation by the VC, these teams would perform appropriate civil affairs
functions, provide intelligence, and support allied forces in many ways.
Should the VC refrain from extensive overt action, the teams would push
vigorous rural construction.

In the last half of May, fresh trouble blew up. After an alleged
abortive coup attempt on May 20-21, and disorders in the streets, Quat
tried to reshuffle his cabinet, without first clearing it with Suu. Suu
objected, and the two disagreed on who had the right to decide; such a
misunderstanding was understandable, in view of the lack of any recognized
constitution and in view of the chaos of the preceding months. The crisis
simmered past the end of May, and Taylor correctly predicted the end of
civilian government, with evident relief. 10/

3. First Moves on Command and Control, March and April, 1965

When the Marines arrived in March, the control measure devised
for the employment was the TAOR. Under the overall suzerainty of the
VN Corps Commander, the Marines were given a well defined geographical
area, in which U.S. forces exercised command authority over military forces
and for which the U.S. accepted defensive responsibility." 11

On March 3, Ambassador Taylor cabled his fears that GVN would
"shuck off greater responsibility on the USG," 12/ and the same day,
in another message, he said he had no idea what the GVN attitude to a

Marine Landing Force might be. 13/

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
