Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Western Europe can be considered as a means of buying increased time for
both preparations and movements, if there should be an invasion of that
area. Further, the provision of new armaments of United States manu-
facture would serve to strengthen the industrial mobilization base of
United States forces. The overall benefits tc be derived are cumulative

put over a period of time must depend largely upon the self-help efforts
of the recipient nations.

The major portion of the funds appropriated in the Mutual
Defense Assistance Act of 1949 is earmarked for members of the North
Atlantic Treaty organization possessing major capabilities for self-help.
While the Joint Chiefs of Staff cannot at this time recommend definite
limitations on future assistance to these nations, they would suggest both

progressive reductions in the aid to be provided in the future, and a time
limit determined primarily by:

a. Planned force requirements;

b. The world situation generally;
e. The finite benefits derived from each program toward
the attainment of United States objectives; and

d. The concrete demonstrations by recipient nations of
self-help toward their national and collective security.

Further, and as a contingency in addition to a limit in time beyond which
assistance to the North Atlantic Treaty members will not be extended, it
should be emphasized the continuation of military aid even within that
limit will be dependent upon the efforts for self-help and mutual aid
exerted by each recipient nation since United States military aid can
support but not replace efforts at self-help and will to resist.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff will continue to review the objectives
of future military assistance programs and will recommend changes in these
Objectives to you as they become appropriate.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

(SIGNED)
OMAR N. BRADLEY,

Chairman,
Joint Chiefs of Staff

cOPY

