aa,

he,

43.

is,

is.

uz,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho Chi Minh has constantly given impression that
"he would pay great attention to any suggestions"
made by the U.S. O'Sullivan (Hanoi) to Byrnes,

SURESH DAG ac saves wisiee Koln sie selue eo aree asics ows aie enle ieieieaelcies'a cle

U.S. Consul in Hanoi views Vietnam strength in
Cochin-China as "diminishing," that Ho went to
Paris for this reason, and at the same time, to
seek support from French Left Wing. O'Sullivan

to Byrnes, 3) June UGUG, sic wis deep eee esos ease deems eee enales ees

Caffery reports Franco-Vietnam conference at
Fontainebleau is off to a bad start, as Viet-
namese delegation protested assumption of the
chairmanship by head of the French delegation,
protested creation of Cochin-China as an inde-
pendent state, and accused French of violating
6 March agreement. Ho Chi Minh held conversa-
tions with Algerians on similarity of their

problems. Caffery 3323 to Byrnes, 7 July 1946....cccesceces

Vietnam breaks off negotiations at Fontainebleau
on the grounds that France violated March 6
accord by convoking a new Dalat conference.

Caffrey 3801 to Byrnes, 2 August 1946....cscccecccccscrevces

U.S. views recent moves by the French as de-
Signed to regain a large measure of control

over Indochina in "violation of the spirit

of the 6 March convention" and that widespread
hostilities may result from Vietnamese resistance
to these encroachments. Memorandum by Moffat

(SEA)) for Viricent. (FRA), '9:-August: LONG. ~iasc cea. ce eu eeeeoes

U.S. views results of Dalat conference as a
reasonable basis for the future, but far short
of larger degree of independence desired by
Vietnam, and it is difficult "to foresee any
great degree success...so long as Cochin-China
stays apart from Vietnam..." Reed 342 to Brynes,

17 August DHE winnie a atare ied awe iniece oenee ee

U.S. expresses concern over "French colonial
tendency picture U.S. as aggressive and imperial-
istic" and indicates closeness of this unwitting
French colonial view to Communist Party line.
Clayton (Acting SecState) 240 to Saigon, .

eer een ee

h September VGUGs sioercses vials sloss eeleiia Sibls e'e\e/alsipie sie'e pinvele ele ieee

viii

7

_ 721

73

7h

i

78

78

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

