Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of talks that read like hagsling in an Arabian marketplace, Porter went
to Ky about it and got the following understanding:

The GVN accepts the principle of contributing to free ~°
world forces locel expense and will make a contribution of
1 billion piasters for that purpose at the end of March 1967.
The matter of further contribution would be considered at
that time. I would send him a letter of understanding on that

subject. 13/
The story was much the same on GVN support for AID projects. 14/

The Saigon Port congestion problem led to discussions starting around
the Istof October, which produced nominal, ineffective agreements in the
first week. When McNamara went to Saigon to discuss new major troop de-
ployments with MACY, he talked to Ky on October 11, Ky kept talking about
infiltration whenever McNamara brought up the subject of the Port. Finally,
Ky said he had solved the Port problem by telling the Minister of Finance
"to write a decree to get rid of the mafia which was dominating the port.” 15/

That did not solve the problem; the Embassy kept pressing. On Noven-
ber 2, Ky promised a tough decree on port management and a deliver-or-
get-fired order to the General who had been put in charge of the Port after
the Jume agreement. (Accepting merely this order would permit further
delay before any change in the system, of course.) Later on in November,
Ky changed port charges and accepted some increase in US military personnel
there; but both GVN and MACV strongly resisted any inerease in MACV re-
sponsibility for the port. The GVil also refused to confiscate goods left
unclaimed over 30 days in the port warehouses. Further telks in December
got nowhere, although State authorized drastic leverage to move GVN:

To this end you might also tell Ky that I have gone so far
as to propose a two month moratorium on shipment of US financed
CIP goods beginning 1 January to permit backlog in transit
warehouses and on barges to be removed. You could cite my view
as being that if GVN won't clear port, why should US add to con-
gestion by continuing to ship goods?

I recognize that actual moratorium would be draconian measure
and perhaps unrealistic, but citing it...might help move Ky. 16/

h, Corruption Becomes an Issue at Year's End
The issue of corruption came up in several ways in November and Decem-

per, 1966. On November 10, Ky told Lodge he was now prepared to relieve
General Quang of his camnand of IV Corps, following up on intentions he

_ first told Lodge about in August. Lodge again urged caution, saying Ky

should carefully avoid starting "another General Thi incident." But Lodge
was satisfied thet by this time Ky had prepared well for the move. 17/

; 38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
