Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

*% 2 5
duty)” are considered strategic reserves.

The strategy of proponents of COURSH B is based on
their belief that we are in a military situation that
cannot be changed materially by expanding our military
effort, that the politico-pacification situation in
South Vietnam will improve but not fast, and that (in
view of all this) Hanoi will not capitulate soon. An
aspect of the strategy is a "cool" drive to settle the
war -- a deliberate process on three fronts: Large
unit, politico-pacification, and diplomatic. Its
approach on the large-unit front is to maintain the

¥General Wheeler has explained where the first 2-1/3
divisions would go: "One on the DMZ to relieve the
Marines to work with ARVN on pacification; one east of
Saigon to relieve the 9th Division to deploy to the
Delta to increase the effectiveness of the three good
ARVN divisions now there; the brigade to Quang Neai
to make there the progress in pacification in the next
year that we have made in Binh Dinh in the past year."
Thus the bulk of the first 100,000 men are for pacifica-
tion and for the Delta. General Westmoreland said
regarding the Delta, “in the Fourth Corps, there is
no threat of strategic VC victories and there are
three good ARVN divisions there." The question arises
whether US combat troops should be devoted to pacifica-
tion or to the Delta. Are these not matters for the
Vietnamese? The Delta may be a test case of the pro-
posed strategy. It is normally stated that “in order
to win in Vietnam we must win in the Delta where the
people are." This obviously implies that Saigon's
writ must run throughout the Delta. But two facts
appear: (1) The Delta is a fairly active VC area, in
which a moderately high level of Stage II guerrilla
warfare tactics are pursued; and (2) the VC effort is
primarily indigenous (that is, the North Vietnamese
Main Force units play almost no role). If our "success"
objective is solely to check or offset North Vietnam's
fercefil intervention in the South, we are in that
position already in the Delta! Must we go further and
do the job for the South Vietnamese? What kind of a
deal could the contending forces cut in the Delta?

161 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
