Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

_perhaps Zorthian. The subjects of prime interest were how Khanh was
taking hold, and the dangers of further coups. Next in importance were
the effectiveness of the civil administration and the morale of major
religious and political groups, and measures to strengthen and buttress
the Khanh regime. On the economic side, the Secretary hoped to get a
full review of the economy, the budget, price and supply trends, ATD
operations, and, finally, the possibility of land reform and tax
forgiveness. On the military side, it was suggested they begin with
the broad picture, and later proceed to selected critical provinces
and specific provincial plans.

The main interest, with respect to intelligence and reporting, was
to review Country Team recommendations concerning periodic assessments
and joint reporting requirements. After this the interest centered
on intelligence concerning the VC --specifically the extent of their
control and activities in the provinces, intentions and tactics, and
indicators thereof. Then, clearly in anticipation of possible require-
ment for public relations materials for use in U.S.:

4. Handling of intelligence bearing on con-
trol and direction of Viet Cong from North Vietnam
including infiltration of personnel and weapons
and operation of communications net. One of our
basic projects here is preparing strongest
possible material on this subject for use as
appropriate to support stronger measures. We
need to be sure your intelligence effort is
geared to furnish such information promptly
in usable form.

5. Review of draft (which we will supply)
of control and support of VC by North Vietnam. 56/

Concerning current operational problems, the items foreseen to
be of interest were policy on possible evacuation of dependents, review
of GVN national and provincial plans, rural rehabilitation plans,
adequacy and deployment of ARVN, status and problems of paramilitary
forces, current status and possible expansion of the U.S. Special Forces’
role in connection with Civilian Irregular Defense Groups (CIDG),
status of plans to reduce or reorganize U.S. forces as GVN became
capable of performing functions currently performed by U.S., review
of political and psywar progress, and of military tactics against VC,
and "possible modification of existing operation [za] restrictions."

The special third country problems of French activities in RVN,
and of Cambodia and Laos, would be dealt with in executive session.

The last item listed for special consideration was to review
Operations Plan 34A-64, for feasibility, adequacy, and possible expan-

TOP SECRET - Sensitive ©

ihe}
