Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and did not in any way affect the probability of success of the
undertaking, were allowed to govern rather than considerations

of limitations in U.S. resources and capabilities, and the basic
difficulty of the task at hand. Increasingly a characteristic

of U.S. decision making, such compromise maximized the probability
of consistently selecting the least desirable course of action.

-- The threat to Vietnam was perceived as constituted of the
sects and the Viet Minh residue in the South, and the regular forces
of the DRV in the North; although it was consistently estimated
that the DRV had the capability to overrun South Vietnam, it was
just as consistently estimated that the DRV neither needed nor
intended to do so. Nonetheless, U.S. doctrine regarding estimates
of capability as opposed to estimates of intention with its
characteristic emphasis on Order of Battle data (so small a part
of the real intelligence problem in counterinsurgency) led to
fixation upon the more massive, but less likely, threat of
overt invasion.

~- The dual mission expected of the Vietnamese army of
internal and external defense was, given resource and trained
manpower limitations, internally inconsistent. Given the state
of U.S. strategic thinking in the 1950's, the nature of SEATO, the
withdrawal of the FHC, the pressures exerted by Diem, and .the
background of the U.S. MAAG, rooted in the recent Korean experience,
it was virtually certain to lead to a conventional military
establishment designed to counter a conventional threat. It did.
In fact, given the strength of these influences and the lack of
U.S. familiarity with effective counterinsurgerttechniques, it
is questionable whether assignment of a single mission related
exclusively to internal security would have made any difference
in the type of military establishment that resulted. ,

-- The South Vietnamese army was in extremely poor condition
in 1954; its prospects were worse, in view of the limited
resources, particularly in terms of personnel, the U.S. was
able to devote tq its reorganization and training. In addition,
as the JCS stated, "Unless the Vietnamese themselves show an
inclination to make individual and collective sacrifices required
to resist Communism, which they have not done to date, no amount
of external pressure and assistance can long delay complete
Communist victory in South Vietnam." * There was no over-
Whelming change in the willingness to sacrifice during the late
1950's, which added to the already formidable task of creating
an effective military establishment.

-- The way in which the U.S. MAAG went about creating an
effective military establishwent had four principal characteristics:

Memorandum for SecDef from JCS, "Indochina," 17 November 1954 (7S).

Sod TOP SECRET - Sensitive

>
