Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"intensifying 34-A operations and initiating air operstions against
Selected targets as an interim substitute for more positive measures," 20/

: On 4 November, the JCS repeated in writing their recommendations
of the lst, adding some explanetory comment and taking issue with certain
aspects of the Taylor recommendations. They explained that they con-
sidered the VC attack on Bien Hoa airfield “a deliberate act of escala~
tion and a change of the ground rules under which the VC have operated
up to now." They cautioned against “undue deley or restraint” in making
&@ response, since it "could be misinterpreted by our allies in Southeast
Asia, as well as by the DRV and Commmist China" and “could encourage
the enemy to conduct additional attecks...." Referring to Ambassador
Taylor's recommendation to announce a policy of reprisal bombing, the
JCS denounced a "tit-for-tat" policy as "uduly restrictive” and tending
to "pass to the DRV substantial initistives with respect to the nature
and timing of further U.S. actions." 21/ They concluded:

"Early U.S. military action against the DRV would lessen
the possibility of misinterpretation by the DRV and Commmist
China of U.S. determination and intent and thus serve to deter
further VC attecks such es that at Bien Hoa."

In the meantime, there had been created what may have been the
only concrete result from the high-level policy deliberations following
the Bien Hoa incident. An interagency task force, known as the NSC
Working Group, had begun an intensive study of future U.S. courses of
action. Recommendations from the JCS and others were passed on to that
group for incorporation in their work. 22/

2. Formation of the NSC Working Group

The "NSC Working Group on SVN/SEA" held its first meeting at
0930 hours, 3 November, thus placing the decision to organize such a
group at sometime earlier -- probably on 2 November or perhaps even at
the high-level meeting on 1 November. Its charter was to study
"immediately and intensively" the future courses of action and alterna-
tives open to the United States in Southeast Asia and to report as
appropriate to a "Principals Group" of NSC members. In turn, this group
of senior officials would then recommend specific courses of action to
the President. Initially, the working group was given approximately
one week to ten days to complete its work. 23/ Actually, it developed
and recast its reports over a period of three weeks or more.

Four agencies were represented in the formal membership of the
group. The Department of State contingent included Assistant Secretary
Bundy (Chairman), Marshell Green, Michael Forrestal (both of the Bureau
of Far Eastern Affairs), end Robert Johnson (of the Policy Planning
Council). Assistant Secretary (ISA) McNaughton represented OSD. Vice
Admiral Lloyd: Mustin was the JCS member. The CIA was represented by
Harold Ford. Other staff members from these agencies assisted in work
on specific topics. 2)/

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
