[G0

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Task Force Report contained no hint of such a qualification, and there
was only a quite vague warning in the State revisions. Part of the rea-
son, undoubtedly, was the 6 month's additional experience in dealing
with Diem. A larger part, though, almost certainly flowed from the fact
that the insurgency had by now shown enough strength so that there was
now in everyone's minds the possibility that the U.S. might someday face
the choice of giving up on Vietnam or taking over a major part of the
war.

These warnings (that even a major U.S. commitment to the ground war
would not assure success) were obviously in some conflict with the recom-
mendations both papers made for a clear-cut U.S. commitment to save South
Vietnam. The contrast is all the sharper in the joint Rusk/McNamara memo-
randum, where the warning is so forcefully given.

Here is the Rusk/McNamara memorandum. 17/

TOP SECRET November 11, 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

Subject: South Viet-Nam
1. United States National Interests in South Viet-Nam.

The deteriorating situation in South Viet-Nam requires atten-
tion to the nature and scope of United States national interests
in that country. The loss of South Viet-Nam to Communism would
involve the transfer of a nation of 20 million people from the free
world to the Communist bloc. The loss of South Viet-Nam would make
pointless any further discussion about the importance of Southeast
Asia to the free world; we would have to face the near certainty
that the remainder of Southeast Asia and Indonesia would move to a
complete accommodation with Communism, if not formal incorporation
within the Communist bloc. The United States, as a member of SEATO,
has commitments with respect to South Viet-Nam under the Protocol
to the SEATO Treaty. Additionally, in a formal statement at the
conclusion session of the 1954 Geneva Conference, the United States
representative stated that the United States "would view any renewal
of the aggression . . . with grave concern and seriously threatening
international peace and security."

1:25
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
