Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Id s-
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. Finally, there were the appendices by the military and especially
the State representatives on the Mission which, as indicated by the extracts
given in the previous section, paint a much darker picture than the reader
gets from the main paper. Even when, as is frequently the case, their
recommendations are not much different from the main paper, the tone is one
of trying to make the best of a bad situation, rather than of seizing an
opportunity.

Because of these distinctions between the different parts of the
Report, two people reading ‘the full Report could come away with far different
impressions of what sort of problem the U.S. was facing in Vietnam, depending
on which parts of the Report seemed to them to ring truest. Presumably,
officials' judgments here were influenced by their reading of the series of
cables that arrived during and just after the Taylor visit, many of which
touch On critical points of the report.

Here are some samples.

The day Taylor left, Nolting sent a cable describing the immediate
mood in Saigon in pretty desperate terms. All parts of the Taylor Report,
including the main paper, did the same. The distinctions in describing the
situation were in how deep-rooted the immediate malaise was seen. The
main effect of this cable from Nolting was presumably to add weight to the
warning of the Report that something dramatic had to be done if the U.S.
were not ready to risk a collapse in Saigon within a few months. As the
Taylor Report stressed and the cable implies, the very fact of the Taylor
Mission would have a very negative impact if nothing came out of it.

There has been noticeable rise in Saigon's political temperature
during past week. Taylor visit, though reassuring in some respects,
has been interpreted by many persons as demonstrating critical
stage which VC insurgency has reached...Following deterioration of
general security conditions over past two months cancellation
October 26 national day celebrations to devote resources to flood
relief and terse, dramatic declaration national emergency caught

an unprepared public by surprise and contributed additional un-
settling elements to growing atmosphere of uneasiness...

This growing public disquietude accompanied by increasing dis-
Satisfaction with Diem's methods of administration on part senior
GVN officials. There is considerable cabinet level criticism and
growing though still inchoate determination force organizational
reforms on President. Similar attitude seems be developing in
ARVN upper levels. Though trend of thinking these groups taking
parallel courses, there nothing indicate at this moment that col-
laboration between them taking place. Beginnings of this would,
of course, be serious indicator something brewing.

110
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
