Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

new economic and social measures to be undertaken in rural areas to
accompany the anti-guerrille effort...." 11/ These discussions implied

that more GVN effort should be devoted to rural pacification and civic action
and acknowledged that more regular military forces were needed, but they

did little to clarify the relationships of these parts to the whole or to

an overall scheme by which the process would develop.

The Staley group, a joint economic and financial committee co-
chaired by Dr. A. Eugene Staley, Stanford Research Institute, and Vu Quoc
Tuc, GVN, followed much the same pattern. Meeting in Saigon in June 1961,
the committee agreed that RVNAF strength should be increased to 200,000
during CY 1962 and that U.S. funding should be provided to various emergency
economic and social programs. 12/ But the group did noghing to tie together
the strands of what it recognized as the central problem: to achieve a
simultaneous “breakthrough" on both the military-internal security front
and the economic-social front. 13/ Its recommendations were restricted
(in part, no doubt, because of its limited charter) to specific program
increases and to a restatement of the dimensions of the problem.

The devastation caused by the September monsoonal floods (320,000
refugees, 1,000 kilometers of road destroyed, 10 million acres of rice and
other crops lost), combined with the losses attributable to increased insur-
gent activity, led President Diem to declare a state of national emergency
on 19 October 1961. This declaration coincided with the visit to Southeast
Asia (15 October - 3 November) of General Maxwell D. Taylor, heading a
mission asked by President Kennedy to appraise the situation in South Viet-
nam. The President stated the scope of Taylor's mission in the broadest
terms:

While the military part of the problem is of great
importance in South Viet-Nam, its political, social, and
economic elements are equally significant, and I shall ex-
pect your appraisal and your recommendations to take full
account of them. 14/

In his report to the President, General Taylor sketched out the
nature and aims of the Viet Cong threat and assessed the strengths and
weaknesses of the Diem government. He proposed a U.S. strategy for "turn-
ing the tide and for assuming the offensive in Vietnam." 15/ The report
warrants summarizing in some detail, not because it outlined the main
thrust of the pacification effort (it did not), but because it represents
the best document to portray the range of U.S. concerns at the time the
U.S. was making a major commitment to South Vietnam and because it lays
out the major elements of the U.S. strategy of response.

The Viet Cong, Taylor judged, were militarily powerful and becom-
ing more powerful. But they were not yet ready to move to the third,
climactic phase of Mao's classic format for guerrilla warfare:

The military strategy being pursued is, evidently, to
pin down the ARVN on defensive missions; to create a per-
vasive sense of insecurity and frustration by hit-and-run
raids on self-defense corps and militia units, ambushing

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
