Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

EVOLUTION OF THE WAR

THE ROLLING THUNDER PROGRAM BEGINS

Te INTRODUCTION--Pleiku Pulls the Trigger

At 2:00 a.m. on the morning of February 7, 1965, at the end of five
days of Tet celebrations and only hours after Kosygin had told a cheering
crowd in Hanoi that the Soviet Union would "not remain indifferent" if
"acts of war" were committed against North Vietnam, Viet Cong guerrillas
carried out well-coordinated raids upon a U.S. advisers’ barracks in Pleiku
and upon 2a U.S. helicopter base at Camp Holloway, some four miles away.

Of the 137 American soldiers hit in the two attacks, nine eventually died

and 76 had to be evacuated; the losses in equipment were also severe: 16
helicopters damaged or destroyed and six fixed-wing aircraft damaged, making
this the heaviest communist assault up to that time against American installa-
tions in South Vietnam.

The first flash from Saigon about the assault came on the ticker at
the National Military Command Center at the Pentagon at 2:38 p.m. Saturday,
February 6, Washington time. It triggered a swift, though long-contemplated
Presidential decision to give an “appropriate and fitting" response. Within
less than 14 hours, by 4:00 p.m. Sunday, Vietnam time, 49 U.S. Navy jets --
A- Skyhawks and F-8 Crusaders from the Seventh Fleet carriers USS Coral Sea
and USS Hancock -- had penetrated a heavy layer of monsoon clouds to deliver
their bombs and rockets upon North Vietnamese barracks and staging areas at
Dong Hoi, a guerrilla training garrison 40 miles north of the 17th parallel.
On the following afternoon, a flight of 24 VNAF A-1H Skyraiders,; cancelled
the previous day because of poor weather, followed up the attack by striking
a military communications center in the Vinh Linh area just north of the
border.

Though conceived and executed as a limited one-shot tit-for-tat reprisal,
the dramatic U.S. action, long on the military planners' drawing boards
under the operational code name FLAMING DART, precipitated a rapidly moving
sequence of events that transformed the character of the Vietnam war and the
U.S. role in it. It was also the opening move in what soon developed into
an entirely new phase of that war: the sustained U.S. bombing effort against
North Vietnam. It is the purpose of this paper to reconstruct the immediate
circumstances that led up to the FLAMING DART decision, to retrace the changes
in rationale that progressively transformed the reprisal concept into a sus-
tained graduatec bombing effort, and to chronicle the relationship between
that effort and the military-political moves to shore up Saigon and the
military-diplomatic signals to dissuade Hanoi, during the crucial early
months of February through May of 1965.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
