Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

where much has happened to inspire confidence during the past
10 years. We have done all that we knew how to do to contri-
bute and to help build that confidence....

Over time, a wider, framework of peace and security in
Southeast Asia may become possible. The new cooperation of
the nations in the area could be a foundation-stone. Cer-
tainly friendship with the nations of such a Southeast Asia
is what the United ‘States seeks -- and that is all that the
United States seeks.

One day, my fellow citizens, there will be peace in South-
east Asia.

It will come because the people of Southeast Asia want
it -- those whose armies are at war tonight, and those who,
though threatened, have thus far been spared.

Peace will come because Asians were willing to work for
it -- and to sacrifice for it -- and to die by the thousands
for it.

But let it never be forgotten: peace will come also
because America sent her sons to help secure it.

It has not been easy -- far from it. During the past
four and a half years, it has been my fate and my responsi-
bility to be commander-in-chief. I have lived -- daily and
nightly -- with the cost of this war. I know the pain that
it has inflicted. I know perhaps better than anyone the
misgivings that it has aroused.

Throughout this entire, long period, I have been sus-
tained by a single principle:

-- that what we are doing now, in Vietnam, is vital
not only to the security of Southeast Asia, but it is
vital to the security of every American.

Surely we have treaties which we must respect.
Surely we have commitments that we are going to keep.
Resolutions of the Congress testify to the need to
resist aggression in the world and in Southeast Asia.

+ the heart of our involvement in South Vietnam --

under three Presidents, three separate Administrations --
has always been America's own security.

87. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
