Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"1. The area around Saigon and south of Saigon (all
of the Delta) must be pacified. This area includes about
55 to 60% of the population of Vietnam. ‘'Pacified' is
defined as the existence of a state of mind among the people
that they have a stake in the government us shown by the
holding of local elections. It also means a proper local
police force. In brief, a pacified area is economically,
socially, and politically a part of the RVN.

"2. The thickly populated northeastern strip along the
coast which includés 25% of the population would be com-
pletely pacified.

"3. The GVN would retain its present control of all
cities and all provincial capitals.

"h, All principal roads would be open to the Vietnamese
military day and night.

"5S. Those areas not pacified would not be safe havens
for the VC but would be contested by energetic offensive
forays to prevent consolidation of a conmunist base.

"6, The VC disarms; and their weapons and explosives
are removed from their hands. Their main force units broken up.

"7, North Vietnam stops its infiltration,

"8. Chieu Hoi rehabilitation would be extended to indiv-
iduel VC who are suitable...

"9. Hardcore VC to go to North Vietnan.
"10. GVN to approve.

"COMMENT: ‘This means that we would not be insisting on the
complete elimination of the VC although no safe haven would be
allocated them. It would mean that we and the GVN would control
80 to 85% of the population and that the VC would be limited
to the jungle and mountainous areas where they would go on as
bandits, much as their counterparts in Malaya and Luzon -- and
where the GVN would have the right to pursue them and try to
destroy them." 28/

Lodge's formula for a satisfactory outcome is based on the absolute
necessity of controlling the villages. In day-to-day terms this meant
that, as Ambassador, Lodge had to push pacification as hard as possible.
Thus, he was quite pleased with the emphasis that came out of the
Honolulu conference in February of 1966.

‘ 5s TOP SECRET - Sensitive
