Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Union as well. The North Vietnamese and the Chinese Communists heve |
chosen to make South Viet-Nam the test case for their particular ver-
sion of the so-called ‘wars of national liberation.' The extent to .
which violence should be used in overthrowing non-Communist governments
has been one of the most bitterly contested issues between the Chinese
and the Soviet Communists. Although the former Chairman, Mr. Khrushchev,
fully endorsed ‘wars of national liberation' as the preferred means of
extending the sway of communism, he cautioned that ‘this does not neces-
sarily mean that the transition to Socialism will everywhere and in all
eases be linked with armed uprising and civil war....Revolution by peace-
ful means accords with the interests of the working class and the masses.'

"The Chinese Communists, however, insist that:

"Peaceful co-existence cannot replace the revolutionary struggles
of the people. The transition from capitalism to socialism in any country
can only be brought about through proletarian revolution and the dictator-
ship of the proletariat in that country....The vanguard of the proletariat \
will remain uncongquerable in all circumstances only if it masters all forms
of struggle--peaceful and armed, open and secret, legal and illegal, par-
liamentary struggle and mass struggle, and so forth. (Letter to the
Central Committee of the Communist Perty of the Soviet Union, June lh,

1963.)'

"Their preference for violence was even more emphatically expressed
in an article in the Peiping People's Daily of March 31, 1964:

'Tt is advantageous from the point of view of tactics to refer
to the desire for peaceful transition, but it would be inappropriate to
emphasize the possibility of peaceful transition....the proletarian party
must never substitute parliamentary struggle for proletarian revolution
or entertain the illusion that the transition to socialism can be achieved,
through the parliamentary road....Violent revolution is a universal lew
of proletarian revolution. To realize the transition to socialism, the
proletariat must wage armed struggle, smash the old state machine and
establish the dictatorship of the proletariet.'

.

"'Political power, ' =D article quotes Mao Tse~tung es saying, ‘grows
out of the barrel of a gun.

"Throughout the world we see the fruits of these policies and in
Viet-Nam, particylarly, we see the effects of the Chinese Communists'
more militant stance and their hatred of the free world. They make no
secret of the fact that Viet-Nam is the test case, and neither does the
regime in Hanoi. General Giap, head of the North Vietnamese army, recently
said that 'South Viet-Nam is the model of the national liberation move-
ment of our time....If the special warfare that the U.S. imperialists are
testing in South Viet-Nam is overcome, then it can be defeated everywhere
in the world.' And Pham Ven Dong, Premier of North Viet-Nem, pointed out
that 'The experience of our compatriots, in South Viet-Nam ettracts the
attention of the world, especially the peoples of South America.'

D-52
