ihe

IPs

He

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Matthews reports to President Truman of French desires

to participate in Far East war and the JCS view that

little military value would accrue from the French

forces. Memorandum by Matthews for Truman, 16 May 1945....... 27

Grew reviews for Hurley the present position of U.S,

policy on _trusteeship structure" and the necessity of

"voluntary" action by colonial powers and that the extent

of French participation in the war in the Pacific was

to be determined by Gen MacArthur. Grew 873 to Hurley (China)
TS LOS sie eacn sin oe wlaca'e eniats evel bas (asus Nola aot y pec deanasatenacs | a0

The U.S, military reply to the French offer of partici-

pation (by two French divisions)in the Pacific war out-

lines the provisions to acceptance in principle. Essen-

tially, the U.S. desires complete command and control of

the French trained, equipped and maintained divisions

with movement from France based on the units haying

attained U.S. combat standards. Memorandum by U.8.

Chiefs of Staff to Combined Chiefs of Staff at Potsdem,

DG ELLY LOUD a. siete ieiinser> wyataveatyis srotbness into a ala ois ome ae oaF lass ol s\eicheveainien © 1 oe

The U.S. Chiefs of Staff views that logistics considera-
tions prevented French and Dutch participation in the ==
Pacific war are presented to the Combined Chiefs of

Staff for consideration. Memorandum by the U.S. Chiefs

of Staff at Potsdam, 18 July 1945...--000-+5 Se ieideetave ciety a/atale as. (36

The British Chiefs of Staff suggest that the French

divisions be “employed in dve course in French Indo-

China." Memorendum by British Chiefs of Staff at

Potsdai, 2O. Twi 1945 wi vccanoe catleawinesussmecdicsmeaecdegaeess OL

The U.S. Chiefs of Staff consider the British view

and compromise cerlier U.S. positions to allow for

possible use of French divisions under British commend

in ereas to "be determined later.” Memorandum by

U.S, Chiefs of Staff at Potsdem, 19 July 194%5...... slapiere igi Sere LOK

Report to the President and Prime Minister of the agreed
summary of conclusions on the strategic concept and
policies for prosecution of the war, reached by the
Combined Chiefs of Staff ab the terminal conference
of the Postdem meeting, Basically, the Chiefs’ stra-
tegy focused on Japan with the U.S, controlling opera-
tions. The door was lett open for Freneh and Dutch
participation based on "military considerations” and
“shipping” requirements. JCS files, ccs 900/3,
Oy Twly LYS es we ws Anema lvierd sei cieG a'evs Kata Sake sie aisles Wales cw alr eae no

PEE TOP SECRET - Sensitive
