Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the Soviet Union, a goal which could not be briefly attained without
an atomic holocaust, the objective is to punish aggression by lowering
the boom on individual experiments in aggression, while at the same
time refusing to generalize from the individual case to the total war.
Korea had to remain a limited war: limited in. its investment of
American forces, limited in its goal.’

_ “What Rovere and Schlesinger wrote about Korea in 1951, it seems
to me, is no less valid for Viet-Nam today...."

oo oe

"One such irrelevancy--one of the sillier ones--has been the
assertion made in the press in the last few days that the administration
was evoking 'the yellow peril.’ In discussing our interests in South-
east Asia at his press conference last week, Secretary Rusk pointed out
that the free nations of the area fully share our determination to pre-
vent aggression. He said what everyone knows, that these nations--which
are also oriental--are deeply concerned about their long-term security
in the face of a militant, hostile, and rigidly ideological Communist
China."

* * x

"Now is our starting point. Now is from where we must go on. But
while our current action is delimited by responsibilities and decisions
carried over from the past, it also gains by past experience. Significant
to that experience, the experience of all of us who lived through the
period between World Wars I and II, is the finding that armed aggression

cannot be met simply by appeals to reason and virtue. Armed aggression
is not deterred by rhetoric or wishful thinking."

<_ + FF

78. Address by Eugene V. Rostow, Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs, before the Regional Foreign Policy Conference at the
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, October 17, 19673 "Another
Round in the Great Debate: American Security in an Unstable World,"
Department of State Bulletin, November 6, 1967, p. Se

* FF * =

"VIETNAM AND THE U.S. NATIONAL INTEREST

"Tet me take up first the more specific arguments about Viet-Nam
before returning to the broader problem.

"In the view of our Government, the war in Viet-Nam is like the
attack on South Korea and earlier threats to Greece, Iran, and Berlin.

D-130-
