Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in Vietnam is not brigit, I believe that if Diem has firm US
Support and guidance and active French cooperation, or at least
acquiescence, his government has a reasonable prospect of success.

98/

As a result of Collins' recommendations the NSC endorsed a strong
policy in Vietnam: the US would continue to support the Diem government and
continue to press France to carry out its commitments under the Smith-
LaChambre agreement. The NSC approved in principle the programs of mili-
tary and economic aid to implement Collins’ recommendations (about $500
million) and determined to seek reaffirmation of the Manila powers' deter-
mination to react under the SEATO treaty if hostilities were resumed. 99/
Dulles decided to "take the plunge” and begin direct aid to Vietnam on
January 1, 1955. The aid program was to be flexible and fluid, adjusted
according to circumstances and subject to discontinuance at any time, as
at present. 100/

E. Crisis of the Spring, 1955

With strong United States backing, Diem went into the sect crisis
of the spring, 1955. Different from the military coup crisis of Autumn
1954 and the Quat cabinet crisis of December, the sect crisis was resolved
by Diem's taking firm action and was not followed by another. It was fol-
lowed by the end of any real French presence in Vietnam.

1. The Problem of the Sect Armies

The sects had been quiescent but not quiet since Cao Dai and Hoa
Hao ministers had joined the cabinet in September 1954. The end of French
subsidies for sect armies in February shook them out of complaceny. Diem
agreed to pay a part of what the armies had received from the French to ease
the transition of some 40,000 soldiers to civilian life. But transition it
was to be: he would not tolerate armed bands separate from VNA command and
separate from Saigon's political guidance. Sect leaders had different
objectives, however. They wanted to preserve their military forces by
integrating, intact, as many units as possible into the National Army.
(With a VNA force level of 100,000, few could be accommodated; in January
only 6,000 sect troops had been absorbed.) Secondly, the sects wanted sub-
stantial government assistance for soldiers forced to leave the military.
Most important, they wanted recognition of their areas of influence and
Diem's assurance that he would not encroach on their territories. Diem
would countenance no part of this third request. 101/

Since December, a Franco-American group headed by Col. Lansdale
and directed to "come up with a peaceful solution" to the problem had
worked furiously, found a solution and urged its prompt adoption. Generals
Collins and Ely decided to give the matter further study. Lansdale's
reaction: —

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

26
