Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a. Sense of Urgency. As the Working Group began its delibera-
tions, an awareness that another Bien Hoa could occur at any time was
prominent in both the official and the public mind. The tenuous security
of U.S. bases in South Vietnam had received wide publicity. 27/ More-
over, the news services were reporting the threat of civil protest
against the new Saigon government, and the increased level of guerrilla
infiltretion from the North was being publicly aired. 28/ These develop-
ments lent an added sense of urgency to the Group's work. The Chairman
of the Working Group was sensitive to these developments and to related
attitudes within the Administration. For example, he indicated that the
intelligence agencies were "on the verge of...agreement that infiltration
has in fact mounted," and that the Saigon mission was "urging that we
surface this by the end of this week or early next week." He stressed
that "the President is clearly thinking in terms of maximum use of a
Gulf of Tonkin [reprisal] rationale." The nature of such a decision was
expected to be;

either for an action that would show toughness and hold
the line till we can decide the big issue, or as a basis
for starting a clear course of action under...broad
options. ’

He implied that our intention to stand firm in South Vietnam was being
communicated to the USSR ("Secretary Rusk is talking today to Dobrynin")
and indicated the desirability of President Johnson signalling something
similar rather soon through the public media. This was seen as particu-
larly important "to comter any SVN fears of a softening in our policy,”
presumably in view of our not responding to the Bien Hoa attack. 29/

Chairman Bundy was aware also of the significance attached by
some observers to the first U.S. actions after the Presidential election.
As was pointed out to him, "all Vietnamese and other interested observers"
would be watching carefully to "see what posture the newly mandated
Johnson Administration will assume." For this reason, William H. Sullivan,
head of the interagency Vietnam Coordinating Committee (and soon to be
appointed the new U.S. Ambassador to Laos), urged "that our first action
be...One which gives the appearance of a determination to take risks if
necessary to maintain our position in Southeast Asia.” An immediate
retaliation for any repetition of the Bien Hoa attack and armed recon-
naissance missions in the Laotian Panhandle were cited as specific
examples. He went on to recommend to Mr. Bundy:

"I feel that it is important...that the Administration go
on record fairly soon placing our policy in Viet Nem within
the larger perspective of our policies in the Western Pacific,
especially as they involve confrontation with Commnist China.” 30/

A sense of urgency for the Working Group's efforts was also de-

rived from assessments of the trends within South Vietnam. For example,
the intelligence penel composed of CIA, DIA, end Stete/INR members saw

Bird TOP SECRET - Sensitive
