Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. Organization as the Key to Effectiveness
in Pacification (1966-1967)

THE BASIS FOR ORGANIZATIONAL PREOCCUPATION

Several factors contributed to the persistent U.S. preoccupation
in 1966 and 1967 with reorganizing the advisory effort in order better
to support pacification activities. First, it had been an article of
faith for several years within U.S. policymaking circles that only by
winning the "other war" of pacification could the U.S. hope to realize
its objectives in South Vietnam. Secondly, the pacification struggle
was still regarded essentially as a task to be performed by the G --
as the "main force war" no longer was after the introduction of major
U.S. combat forces. Reinforcing this belief was a third factor, the
widely held conviction that U.S, forces could best concentrate on the
main force war while RVNAF focused on pacification.

Such a U.S.-RVNAF division of effort, it was reasoned, would permit
U.S. forces to take advantage of their greater tactical mobility and fire
support without endangering civilian life and property, employ RVNAF in
a menner calculated to minimize the adverse effects of its persistent
inability to generate an offensive-minded esprit, and avoid the cultural.
acclimitization and language difficulties which would face U.S, forces
in the pacification role. It seemed, in short, that RVNAF concentration
on pacification and U.S, concentration on the main force enemy would con-
stitute the optimal use of available resources.

This division of effort meant that most U.S, military advisors would
be directly involved in pacification -- at least periodically if not con-
tinuously. Advisors to regular ARVN units could expect to spend a consid-
erable portion of their time securing pacification programs. Those
advisors whose counterparts had political and administrative responsibil-
ities (e.g., province and district advisors) and paramilitary advisors
(RF and PF) could expect pacification to be their major concern.

But while the majority of U.S. military advisors would be engaged
in pacification activities they would not be the only U.S, advisory
personnel whose responsibilities focused on pacification programs.
Advisors from USOM, CAS, and USIS had overlapping and in some instances
competing responsibilities. Thus it was logical for the U.S. to attempt
to devise an organizationel framework which would serve to coordinate
adequately the activities of the large and diverse body of advisors and
which would be capable to integrate their overlapping functions.

70 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
