Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

concurred in by the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, who ob-
served that other high U.S. military officers in Indochina agreed with
the attaché and found O'Daniel's report unwarrantedly optimistic. 12/

ec. American Policy in Europe: The EDC

An important source of French leverage was to be found out-
side of Far Eastern affairs. A primary objective of American foreign
policy in 1953-1954 was the creation of a European Defense Community
(E.D.C.). The purpose of the EDC was to "envelope" a new West German
Army into an integrated six nation army which would go a long way towards
providing for the defense of Western Europe. Washington officials ex-
pected that the EDC would permit a reduction (but not complete elimination)
of American ground forces in Europe. The membership of France in the EDC --
as a counter-weight to the proposed re-arming of Germany -- was essential
to its adoption by the five other European nations. Because of the high
priority given to EDC in American planning, there was a strong reluctance
to antagonize the French in Indochina. This was reinforced by knowledge
that the French placed a far lower priority on EDC, in part because of
the traditional French fear of:.an armed Germany, in part because the
French estimate of Soviet intentions in Western Europe differed from that
of the United States in that it placed a low probability on a direct
Soviet intervention. 13/ ;

Apparently unnoticed at the time was an implicit contra-
diction in the American policy of pushing the French simultaneously on
both adopting the EDC and on making a greater effort in Indochina. The
latter required increased French forces in the Far East. But the French
National Assembly would not adopt the EDC unless, at a minimum, it was
assured that French forces in Europe would be on parity with those of
Germany. Thus, the French argued that the possible coming into effect
of the EDC prevented them from putting larger forces into Indochina.
After the loss of North Vietnam and the French rejection of EDC, the
Chairman of an Interdepartmental Working Group set up to formulate a new
American policy on Indochina for the post-Geneva period observed that
“our policies thus far have failed because we tried to hit two birds
with one stone and missed both." 14/

d. French Desire for Negotiations

French leverage was also demonstrated by their ability to
have the Indochina problem placed on the agenda for the Geneva Conference
at the time of the Quadripartite Foreign Minister's meeting in February
1954 in Berlin. The Geneva Conference had been called to work out a
political settlement for the Korean War. Dulles did not wish to negotiate
on Indochina until there was a marked improvement in the military situation
of the French and they could negotiate from a position of far greater
strength. But the Laniel Government was under mounting pressure from
French public opinion to end the Indochinese war. At Berlin the French
delegation insisted, despite American objections, that Indochina be

A-ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
