Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

At the Saigon meeting, the concerns of the local officials for
initiating some immediate measures to relieve the situation in South
Vietnam came into conflict with the longer-range scenario approach.
Ambassador Lodge "questioned the wisdom both of massive publicity and
of massive destruction actions before a well-planned and well executed
diplomatic attempt had been made to persuade NVN to call off the
vc." 59/ He went on to propose communicating to Hanoi, through a
third-country "interlocutor," our intent to embark on a "carrot and
stick program," combining the threat of increasing air strikes with the
granting of some assistance to the DRV. His supporting rationale ex-
plicitly cautioned that the VC reaction to large-scale measures against
the North might be violent and damaging to the South Vietnamese economy.
More significant may have been the fact that the "large-scale measures"
proposed in the scenario came quite late in the second stage, a stage
that may not have been entered -- at least for some time.

What the Ambassador had in mind regarding a carrot and stick approach
was not entirely new. It had first been proposed in his memorandum to
Governor Harriman on 30 October 1963. It was raised again in cables to
the White House on 20 February and 15 March 1964. 60/ Initially pro-
posed in the context of a scheme to encourage the neutrality of North
Vietnam, the carrot and stick concept envisioned a secret contact with
Hanoi at which an ultimatum would be delivered demanding the DRV's
cessation of support for the VC insurgency. Rewards for compliance would
include our making available food imports, to help alleviate the known
shortages affecting North Vietnam in late 1963 (and early '64). In the
case of non-compliance, we would undertake previously threatened punitive
strikes to which we would not admit publicly. What was new in the pro- -
posal of 19 April were: (1) the suggestion for using a third country
intermediary and (2) that one element of the "carrot" might be our pledge
to withdraw some U.S. personnel from South Vietnam. The latter suggestion
was criticized by William Bundy on the basis that we didn't yet know how
many and what types of American military personnel were needed in South
Vietnam. Lodge countered with the comment that "it would be very hard
indeed for Ho Chi Minh to provide a salable package for his own people
and for other communist nations unless we can do something that Hanoi
ean point to, even though it would not be a real concession on our
part." 61/

The ensuing discussion, on a variety of points, provided an indica-
tion of some of Secretary Rusk's paramount concerns, which may shed
important light on later policy decisions. For example, he sought
opinions on the likely GYN reaction to a Geneva Conference specifically
for Laos. In andther context, he stated "his concern that the extent of
infiltration and other provisions of support from the North be proven to
the satisfaction of our own public, of our allies, and of the neutralists.'
During a discussion of the availability of other Asian troops to fight in |
Vietnam, Secretary Rusk stated "that we are not going to take on the masses
of Red China with our limited manpower in a conventional war." He also
stated the opinion that the Chinese would not opt to intervene militarily

*

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

————S—«~™

17

