Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

D. The Aftermath of Honolulu.

The importance of combining appearances of a firm posture with
efforts to reduce public doubts on U.S. interests in Southeast Asia appar-
ently struck a responsive chord in the White House. In the military area,
the President apparently recognized the need for more and better informa-
tion, but did not convey a sense of urgency regarding its acquisition.
Possibly just following the meeting, Secretary McNamara expressed his wish
to-discuss North Vietnamese targets and troop movement capabilities with
the JCS on 8 June. 110/_ ‘The following day, he communicated interest to
the Joint Staff in obtaining "facts and statistics" on Haiphong harbor traf-
fic; existing plans for mining the harbor; impacts of such operations on
different import categories; and alternative DRV importation facilities. 111/
On the other hand, non-committing military actions which could improve our
image in Southeast Asia were given immediate approval. On the same day
he received the request for Haiphong mining information, the Director of
the Joint Staff informed the Army of a Mellamara directive calling for "imme-
diate action...by the Army to improve the effectiveness and readiness status
of its materiel prestocked for possible use in Southeast Asia." Specifically,
the Secretary ordered (1) augmenting the stockage at Korat, in Thailand, to
support a ROAD Infantry Brigade and (2) giving first priority at the Okinawa
Army Forward Depot to stocking non-air-transportable equipment required by
an airlifted ROAD Infantry Brigade. 112/ In keeping with the:'Administra-
tion's current policy rationale, the augmentation of contingency war stocks
in Thailand was given extensive press coverage. 113

In non-military areas, the President apparently encouraged further
examination of the vital issues which impacted on national commitment and.
public support. Soon after the 3 June meeting, work was begun under State
Department guidance to assemble information in answer to some of the preva-
lent public questions on Southeast Asian involvement. For example, on
10 June, the Department of Defense was asked to furnish responses to 27
questions developed in State, as a fall-out of the discussions in Honolulu. 114/
Similar questions became a frequent focus for interdepartmental correspondence
and meetings in the coming weeks. Paralleling this effort was an examination
of the desirability of requesting a Congressional resolution. On the same
day that OSD received State's request to furnish information, en interagency
meeting was held to discuss the implications which a resolution would have
for the U.S. policy position and the public rationale which its acceptance
would demand. The relative advantages of having or not having a resolution
were also considered. 115/

To supplement recommendations coming from Honolulu, the President
apparently sought additional guidance to help sort out the alternatives
available to him. Soon after receiving reporss from the Honolulu confer-
ence, he sent a request to Walt Rostow to prepare a public statement for
him, detailing a Governmental view of U.S. policy and. commitments in South-
east Asia. As most likely expected, the rationale and discussion which
resulted took a more aggressive approach than the prevailing views at Hono-
lulu and were not used. 116/ In fact, President Johnson did not deliver

35 - {OP SECRET - Sensitive
