Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In operational terms the first would have meant holding the line--placing
an immediate, low ceiling on the number of U.S. personnel in SVN, and
teking vigorous efforts to build on a stronger base elsewhere, possibly
Thailand. The second alternative would have been to undertake some spec-
tacular, highly visible supporting action like a limited-duration selective
bombing campaign as a last effort to save the South; to have accompanied

it with a propaganda campaign about the unwinnability of the war given the
GVN's ineptness and; then, to have sought negotiations through compromise
and neutralization when the bombing failed. Neither of these options was
ever developed.

The recommendation of the Principals to the President left a gap
between the maximim objective of NSAM 288 and the marginal pressures against
the North being proposed to achieve that objective. There are two by no
means contradictory explanations of this gap.

One explanation is the way in which pressures and the controlled use
of force were viewed by the Principals. There is some reason to believe that
the Principals thought that carefully calculated doses of force could bring
about predictable and desirable responses from Hanoi. The threat implicit
in minimum but increasing amounts of force ("slow squeeze") would, it was
hoped by some, ultimately bring Hanoi to the table on terms favorable to the
U.S. Underlying this optimistic view was a significant underestimate of
the level of the DRV commitment to victory in the South, and an overestimate
of the effectiveness of U.S. pressures in weakening that resolve. The
assumption was that the threat value of limited pressures coupled with
declarations of firm resolve on our part would be sufficient to force the
DRV into major concessions, Therefore, the U.S. negotiating posture could *
be @ tough one. Another factor which, no doubt, commended the proposal to
the Administration was the relatively low-cost--in political terms--of such
action. Furthermore, these limited measures would give the GVN a temporary
breathing spell, it was thought, in which to regroup itself, both politically
and militarily should stronger action involving a direct confrontation between
the two Vietnams be required at some future date. And lastly, it was the
widely shared belief that the recommendation was a moderate solution that
did not foreclose future options for the President if the measures did not
fully achieve their intended results. The JCS differed from this view on
the grounds that if we were really interested in affecting Hanoi's will,
we would have to hit hard at its capabilities.

A second explanation of the gap between ends and means is a more simple
one. Ina phrase, we had run out of alternatives other than pressures.
The GVN was not reforming, ARVN was being hit hard, further U.S. aid and
advice did not seem to do the trick, and something was needed to keep the
GVN afloat until we were ready to decide on further actions at a later
date. Bombing the North would fit that bill, and make it look like we tried.

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
