Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Concurrently: An effort should be made to
strengthen the posture in South Vietnam.
Integrating (interlarding in a single chain
of command) the South Vietnamese and U.S.
military and civilian elements critical to
pacification, down at least to the district
level, might be undertaken.

5. (D-16) Direct CINCPAC to take all prepositioning and
logistic actions that can be taken ‘quietly’ for the D-Day forces
and. the forces described in Paragraph 17 below.

6. (D-15) Get Khanh's agreement to start overt South Viet-
namese air attacks against targets in the North (see D-Day item 15
‘pelow), and inform him of U.S. guarantee to protect South Vietnam
in the event of North Vietnamese and/or Chinese retaliation.

7. (D-14) Consult with Thailand and the Philippines to get
permission for U.S. deployments; and consult with them plus U.K.,
Australia, New Zealand and Pakistan, asking for their open politi-
cal support for the undertaking and for their participation in
the re-enforecing action to be undertaken in anticipation of North
Vietnamese and/or Chinese retaliation.

8. (D-13) Release an expanded ‘Jordan Report,' including
recent photography and evidence of the communications nets, giving.
full documentation of North Vietnamese supply and direction of
the Viet Cong.

9. (D-12) Direct CINCPAC to begin moving forces and making
specific plans on the assumption that strikes will be made on
D-Day (see Attachment B*¥ in backup materials for deployments).

10. (D-10) Khanh makes speech demanding that North Vietnam
stop aggression, threatening unspecified military action if he
does not. (He could refer to a 'carrot.')

11. (D-3) Discussions with Allies not covered in Item 7
above.

12. (D-3) President informs U.S. public (and thereby North
Vietnam) that action may come, referring to Khanh speech (Item 10
above) and declaring support for South Vietnam.

13. (D-1) Khanh announces that all efforts have failed and
that attacks are imminent. (Again he refers to limited goal and
possibly to ‘carrot.')

14, (D-Day) Remove U.S. dependents.

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
