Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"personalism,” like Diem's Spanish-style Catholicism, harbored little
tolerance; merely different political theories were interpreted as competi-
tive, and even dangerous. Personalism thus limited Diem's political hori-
zons, and almost certainly impaired his government's ability to communicate
with the peasantry. "Personalism" became the official philosophy of the
state, and though government employees were required to attend weekly
sessions on its tenets, it never succeeded in becoming much more than the
cant of Diem's administration, and the credo of the two political parties
organized and directly controlled by his family.

kh, Political Parties

The latter were peculiarly Diemist: paternally authoritarian,
organized as an extension of family power. The pivotal organization was
the Personalist Labor Revolutionary Party (Can lao Nhan Vi Cach Mang Dang),
an apparatus devised and controlled by Ngo Dinh Nhu, semi-covert, self-
effacing, but with members stationed at all the levers of power within
Saigon, and a web of informants everywhere in the country. he/ Ngu en-
visaged the Can Lao as the vanguard of Diem's undertakings, and it became
in fact the backbone of the regime. Drawing intelligence from agents at
all echelons of government in the village, in factories, schools, military
units, the Can Lao sought to detect the corrupt or disloyal citizen, and
was empowered to bring him to arrest and trial. The Can Lao, unfortunately
for Diem's political flexibility, concentrated on disloyalty. Ngo Dinh
Nhu, who admitted that the Can Lao closely resembled the communists in
organization and technique, used it to stifle all political sentiment com-
“petitive or opposed to Ngo Dinh Diem.

The other Diemist party was an open, "mass party," the National
Revolutionary Movement (Phong Trao Cach Mang Quoc Gia). 43/ Diem himself
was the honorary leader of the Party, and it was the official vehicle for
his political movement. The Party claimed to have grown from 10,000 members
in 1955 to 1,500,000 in 1959. 44/ In that time it acquired a majority
in the National Assembly, and amassed strong voting records for Diem and
NRM candidates in elections at all levels. The Party claims to have ori-
ginated in "clandestine struggle for the revolution of national independence
and human emancipation" at the time Diem resigned from Bao Dai’s govern-
ment in 1933, but properly it came into being in October, 1954. The NRM
was closely associated with the National Revolutionary Civil Servants League
(Lien Doan Cong Chuc Mang Quoc Gia), and since membership in the latter
was a concomitant of government employment, the civil service became the
core of the NRM. The relationship also established a NRM-League hierarchy
parallel to, and in most instances identical with, the government hierarchy
down to the village level. Obviously, too, the arrangement equated a party
merbership with distinct advantages in dealing with the government. NRM
strength figures were probably exaggerated, and its active members -- those
who attended party functions and political indoctrination sessions -- were
those in the league; the NRM was, in effect, a party of government employees
or dependents.

17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
