Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and by an all-out effort to improve detection devices,
denial weapons, and interdiction tactics.

(5) July: Avoid the explosive Congressional
debate and US Reserve call-up implicit in the Westmore-
land troop request. Decide that, unless the military
situation worsens dramatically, US deployments will be
limited to Program 4-plus (which, according to General
Westmoreland, will not put us in danger of being defeated,
but will mean slow progress in the South). Associated
with this decision are decisions not to use large numbers
of US troops in the Delta and not to use large numbers of
them in grass-roots pacification work.

(6) September: Move the newly elected Saigon
government well beyond its National Reconciliation program
to seek a political settlement with the non-Communist mem-
bers of the NLF -- to explore a ceasefire and to reach an
accommodation with the non-Communist South Vietnamese who
are under the VC banner; to accept them as members of an
opposition political party, and, if necessary, to accept
their individual participation in the national government --
in sum, a settlement to transform the members of the VC
from military opponents to political opponents.

(7) October: Explain the situation to the
Canadians, Indians, British, UN and others, as well as
nations now contributing forces, requesting them to
contribute border forces to help make the inside-South
Vietnam accommodation possible, and -- consistent with
our desire neither to occupy nor to have bases in Vietnam --
offering to remove later an equivalent number of US forces.
(This initiative is worth taking despite its slim chance
of success. )*

His closing paragraph repeated his belief that it had to be made
clear to political and military leaders alike that the troop limit as
imposed by Course B which he recommended was firm and short of an immi-
nent military defeat would not be breached. Westmoreland and the JCS
had to be persuaded that the objective was not to attain "victory" but
to make progress, albeit slow, without the risks attendant to Course A.
He acknowledged that it would not be easy for the President to stick
at 550,000 troops in South Vietnam or to limit the bombing program to
targets south of the 20th parallel, but that it would be possible, and
that in his estimation the benefits of such a course of action tae out-
weighed the political risks which Course A included. 7/

16}, TOP SECRET - Sensitive
