Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -. Sensitive

(Secretary McNamara, accompanied by) Mr. William Bundy (and)
Mr. McNaughton fend 1/ met with Ambassador Taylor, General
Wheeler, Admiral Sharp and General Westmoreland in Honolulu on
Tuesday, April 20. (The minutes of that meeting follow: )
[Following is my report of the meeting: /

1. (There wes consensus that) /fone of them expect’ the
: DRV/VC (cannot be expected) to capitulate, or come to a position
acceptable to us, in less than six months. This is because they
believe that a settlement will come as much or more from VC
failure in the South as from DRV pain in the North, and that it
will take more than six months, perhaps a year or two, to demon-
strate VC failure in the South.

2. With respect to strikes against the North, (it was agreed)
[they all agree] ‘that the present tempo is about right, that
sufficient increasing pressure is provided by repetition and con-
tinuation. All of them envisioned a strike progrem continuing at
least six months, perhaps a year or more, avoiding the Hanoi-
Haiphong-Phuc Yen areas during that period. There might be fewer
fixed targets, or more restrikes, or more armed reconnaissance
missions. Ambassador Tzylor stated what appeared to be a (shared)
fwajority/ view, that it is important not to "kill the hostage" by
destroying the North Vietnamese assets inside the "Hanoi do-nut.'
(It was agreed) /They all believe/ that the strike program is
essential to our campaign -- both psychologically and physically
-- but that it cannot be expected to do the job alone. [Bhey/
All considered it very important that strikes against the North
be continued during any talks.

3. None of (the participants) /them/ sees a dramatic improve-
ment in the South in the immediate future. (The) /[fheir/ strategy
for "victory" (proposed by Ambassador Taylor, General Wheeler,
Admiral Sharp and General Westmoreland) /hovever/ is to break the
will of the DRV/VC by denying them victory. Ambassador Taylor put
it in terms of a demonstration of Communist impotence, which will
lead eventually to a political solution. They see slow improve-
ment in the South, but all (participants) emphasized the critical
importance of holding on and avoiding -- for psychological and
morale reasons -- a spectacular defeat of GVII or US forces. And
they all suspect that the recent VC lull is but the quiet before
a storm...

:, The documenss continue with specific force deployment recommendations
thet were agreed upon at the meeting. In addition, Mciiaughton's minutes
contain the following concluding iten:

It was agreed that tasks within South Vietnam should have
first call on air assets in the area and that, if at any time
there are not enough air assets in the area to perform all

100 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
