Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

£. Dulles' decision: US. Will Consider a Change in Regime

General Collins and Secretary Dulles met on April 27.
Dulles agreed to consider shifting support to either Quat or Do and a
message to this effect was sent to Saigon. 123/ But Dulles determined not
to discuss this with France until a full and frank statement of her inten-
tions had been received. That statement was to include an unequivocal as-
surance to back whole-heartedly any new political arrangements in Saigon
and to resolve "certain ambiguities" in French policy toward North Vietnam.
Until this declaration appeared the US would reveal no change of heart

over Diem. 124/
5- Diem Acts Against the Binh Xuyen
Then the truce exploded. On 28 April, Diem told Lansdale:

The Army and people laid the blame (for the crisis between the
government and the Binh Xuyen) on the French because they could
see French armored vehicles and troops in the streets evidently
ready for action against the Vietnamese, We (Lansdale and an
assistant) told him that it looked as the Vietnamese still
needed a leader, that Diem was still President, that the US was
still supporting him.

That afternoon, Diem's private secretary called Lansdale. He
said the palace was

under heavy mortar fire, that the President was on another line
talking to General Ely, that Ely stated that he couldn't hear
any explosions and the President was holding the mouthpiece out
towards the explosions so Ely could hear them. Hai (the secre-
tary) started to ask what should be done, interrupted himself to
say that the President had just ordered the National Army to
start returning the fire and had so informed Ely. He hung up.
125/ :

Against tne advice of French, US and most cabinet advisors, Diem
had issued a decree charging Police Commissioner Lai Van Sang with "very
grave official misconduct" and named Col. Nguyen Ngoc Le to replace him.

Sang refused to resign, saying only Bao Dai had authority to remove him.
Binh Xuyen troops in Cholon apparently opened fire on National Army units
and Binh Xuyen shells fell again on the palace. But within nine hours after
Diem'’s order to take the offensive, the National Army had driven the Binh
Xuyen back into Cholon. Fires raged (set by the Binh Xuyen, according to
Lansdale); hundreds were killed or wounded. 126/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Sul
