Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The situation was of such concern that CIA dispatched a special officer
to reach an independent evaluation, His conclusion was that we had
hastily expended our capability to overthrow the regime, that an aid
suspension would not guarantee a constructive result, and that to prevent
further political fragmentation we should adopt a "business as usual"
policy to buy time. 100/ Amidst all this internal U.S. dissension, the
GVN announced on September 14 that martial law would end on September

16 and that National Assembly elections would be held September 27, 101/

In Washington, the NSC convened agein September 17 to consider two
alternative proposals for dealing with Diem prepared by Hilsman, The
first, which Hilsman and others at State favored, was the "pressures
and persuasion track," and involved an escalatory ladder of measures
both public and private, including selective aid suspension, to coerce
Diem into getting rid of Nhu and taking steps to restore the political
situation. 102/ The alternative proposal, the "reconciliation with a
rehabilitated GVN track," involved a public posture of acquiescence in
recent GVN actions, recognition that Diem and Nhu were inseparable,
and a decision to salvage as much as possible from a bad situation.
This, of course, would have involved a reopening of the dialogue with
Diem, to which Lodge was opposed. Both proposals assumed that for the
moment a@ coup was out of the question.

There are no available records of what transpired in the meeting,
but two decisions were clearly made. The first was, in effect, to adopt
Hilsman's "pressures and persuasion" proposal. ‘The guidance cable to
he after the meeting, however, came from the White House. It stated

Bes

We see no good opportunity for action to remove present
government in immediate future; therefore, as your most
recent message suggests, we must, for the present, apply such
pressures as are available to secure whatever modest improve-
ments on the scene may be possible. . . Such a course, more-
over, is consistent with more drastic effort as and when means
became available. 103/

Lodge was to press for a reduction of Nhu's authority and his departure
from Saigon, at least temporarily. The cable included a long list of
other measures for the GVN to take to redress the political situation and
gave Lodge complete control over the aid program to enhance his bargaining
position,

This authorization specifically includes aid actions
currently held in abeyance and you are authorized to set
those in train or hold them up further in your discretion.
We leave entirely in your hands decisions on the degree of
privacy or publicity you wish to give to this process. 104/

There is no evidence on the degree of consensus of the principals in
this decision,

29 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
