Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Contrasting sharply with Lansdale's draft was the first draft of the
paper that was finally issued. This was by Gilpatric's military aide,
Col. E.F. Black. It concludes that South Vietnamese forces would have to
be increased by two divisions, mainly to deal with threat of increased
infiltration. Black stressed that the President would have to decide that
the US would no longer be bound by the limitations of the 1954 Geneva
Agreements (which Defense had long been lobbying against). But his paper
recommends no substantial troop commitment. The reference to the Geneva
Agreements apparently referred to a relatively modest increase in manpower
beyond the 685-man ceiling, and to the introduction of new types of equip-
ment not in Vietnam in 195}.

So the record contains three versions of the Annex -- Black's first
draft, Lansdale's alternate draft, and then Black's revised paper, which
was finally isssued as the annex to the Report. The effect of considering
them all is an odd one. The initial Black paper recommends an increase in
Vietnamese forces to deal with the infiltration problem, but no substantial
US troop commitment. The Lansdale alternative recommends a substantial US
troop commitment, but no increase in Vietnamese forces. The final paper
recommends both the RVNAF increase and the US troop commitments, but changes
the reason for each: the reason for the RVNAF increase became a need for
better protection against overt invasion, not an increased infiltration
threat. And the reason for the US troop commitment became 4 desire to
rapidly train the new Vietnamese troops, not for political reassurance. 12/

If taken literally, all of this implies an extraordinarily rapid
series of reappraisals and reversals of judgment. But surely, the only
realistic interpretation is that in this case (because a series of rough
drafts happens to be included in the available file) we are getting a
glimpse at the way such staff paperwork really gets drafted, as opposed
to the much more orderly impression that is given if we saw only the finished
products. Gilpatric (undoubtedly in consultation with at least McNamara,
although the files do not show any record of this) was presumably interested
primarily in what recommendations to make to the President, and secondarily
in providing a bureaucratically suitable rationale for those recommendations.
‘This rationale may, or may not, have coincided with whatever more private
explanation of the recommendations that McNamara or Gilpatric may have con-
veyed to the President or people like McGeorge Bundy and Rostow on the
White House staff. The lesson in this, which will not come as a surprise
to anyone who has ever had contact with the policy-making process, is that
the rationales given in such pieces of paper (intended for fairly wide
circulation among the bureaucracy, as opposed to tightly held memoranda
limited to those closest to the decision-maker) do not reliably indicate
why recommendations were made the way they were.

VI. THE MAY 1 REVIEW
Manwhile, Kennedy, as noted earlier, did not act on the annex at the

April 29 meeting when he approved the much more modest military proposals

ee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
