Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fulfil an achive.ond elective role in ths present wer in accordances
with the over-all stratezic

G
‘Songndiz a to GC.

EBCORT BY COMBINES, Cases oF STAyy

\

Tit, BASIC UNDERTAMINGS AND PGLICTIZS YOR Tau PROSECUMGN
: OF UES WAN?

ie

§. The following basic mdertakings ere consid
the prosecution of the war:— t :

&. Moaintein the security anda war-maling ca ipReeiiy of the Western
Hon sphere end th : Comihonweash as mecessaxy fot whe
fulfillment Gi the strat ie et.

6, Stippart the watsinel: mast ot opr forces tree) vas, Seville

fires priority given to those fovees in in or desivanied for employment :
combat aress in the war ace

¢, Maintain vitel oversess }ines of communication.

6. Ia order to atte the over-all objective, first pt riovity: in the
provision of forces and resouress of the Duited States and Groat
Britsin, eines reorientation irom the Buropeon Tnenses to the

Pacific ‘and F Far Bast, will be given to esting recuirements of tasks
necessary to the exacution of the over-all stratezic concep and to the
basic undertakines fumdamentel to the tes tae of the war.

The} invasion of vepea end operations directly connected therewith
ara the-supreme operations in the wer sealant JEpEA; iorses ond
pesources will be allsex a on the required seals to assure that inivs-
sion can be 2c eS at the earliest practicable date. INo othe
operations wil be undertaken which hazard the success of, or delay,
these main operations.

7, The follow ing additional tasks wiil be une ahaa in order to

assist in the execution of the over-all sirstevic concep

i

Encourage Hussian ents y into the War against ss anon. Provide

v
guek aid to hes wardaaking capacity as inay be necessary and oracti-
cablein comm: mack n therewith,
aie Underiske such measures cs may be necessary and practiogolc!
des to aid the wer effort of China as an effective ally ageinst Jepen.
2m Prowde sesistanee wosuch at the fi fox “ces aS liberated eress 28 can

i

~

é

Ve

7

a Ra Peat ee i rT. 77
resources assist co-beilizerents to ihe extent they are able to employ

= =e Thee then = cae t= _ le eee es =i
this OSSiSLaRCS Ta as 33 Pe GSay WOT Savin TaTaYa 20. LG Suse SST
‘ts ER
ay

—s
Ha

ale

gecomplishment of baste undertakings, to pr pli¢s to ths

liberated | areas as will eZectively contsib
United Nations’ to prosecuis the war gyainsi Jepsen.

ves

2Tycune desis seo ort to i SHIGhE GnO thei Plime Ministar cirtigied on

jy 23 ng bhe on S90/9, the following innguegs constitutes

the com ont ‘(ihe yespeati jeidehae of the Unites
apo aad! Britis | Sus io te é
: Por ene : 7/2, S20 gozsuiont Xen

¥ With tee tesclti my sab fo jal 45
nny Penmie aPs
C. C5 3. Saupe (3s Mier Of Ts Por ere.
ee aon fee = ==.) a pel og waka
Wind fe} Bragsey TS the pas Teper, Ss

she’ selstiesi Pts Sto: C5: 859

Ser tiedaiesaian =

ete

is 1205. J

a8)
