Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As for the study's "highest priority" activities, PROVN recommended:

"(1) Combat Operations -- the bulk of U.S. and FWMA
Forces and designated RVNAF units should be directed against
enemy base ayeas and against their lines of communication
in SVN, Laos, and Cambodia as required; the remainder of
Allied force assets must ensure adequate momentum to activity
in priority Rural Construction areas.

"(2) Rural Construction -- in general, the geographic
priorities should be, in order, the Delta, the Coastal
Lowlands, and the Highlands; currently the highest pri-
ority areas are the densely populated and rich resource
Delta, provinces of An Giang, Vinh Long, Dinh Tuong, Go
Cong, and the Hop Tac area surrounding Saigon.

"(3) Economic Stability -- current emphasis must be
directed toward curbing inflation and reducing the excessive
demands for skilled and semi-skilled labor imposed upon
an over-strained economy..."

On the management of the United States effort -- which PROVN found ex-
tremely poor -- the recommendation was to create a single manager system,
with the Ambassador in charge of all assets in Vietnam and the mission of
producing a single integrated plan. PROVN suggested major steps in the
direction of giving the Ambassador a stronger hold over the military.

Of greatest importance -- aside from the reorganizationeal suggestions --
was the PROVN conclusion on the supremacy of Rural Construction activities
over everything else:

"Rural Construction must be designated unequivocally
as the major US/GVN effort. It will require the commitment
of a preponderance of RVNAF and GVM paramilitary forces,
together with adequate U.S. support and coordination and.
assistance. Without question, village and hamlet security
must be achieved throughout Vietnam...RC is the principal
means available to broaden the allied base, provide secur-
ity, develop political and military leadership, and pro-
vide necessary social reform to the people..." 21/

To this end, PROVN suggested a division of responsibility among the
forces:

"The need to sustain security pervades every ramification
of RC...The various forces capable of providing this environ-
ment must be unified...at the province level. They must in-
‘clude the ARVN as @ major component -- as many of its battle-
+ested units as can possibly be devoted to this mission.
These integrated national security forces must be associated

76 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
