hi.

he,

43,

hy,

hs,

6,

7.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ho Chi Minh has constantly given impression that
"he would pay great attention to any suggestions”
made by the U.S. O'Sullivan (Hanoi) to Byrnes,

5 June CHES ne otariieitcatiel 4 00am pia) avate tel auaneralane tal oie /Suareret

U.S. Consul in Hanoi views Vietnam strength in
Cochin-China 4s "diminishing," that Ho went to
Paris for this reason, and at the same time, to
seek support from French Left Wing. O'Sullivan
Go Pytees, 5 TUNES TOYWG occ vwicewieis vwie eee vinisicre 0 si vinice

Caffery reports Franco-Vietnam conference at
Fontainebleau is of f to a bad start, as Viet-
namese delegation protested assumption of the
chairmanship by head of the French delegation,
protested creation of Cochin-China as an inde-
pendent state, and accused French of violating

6 March agreement. Ho Chi Minh held conversa-
tions with Algerians on similarity of their
problems. Caffery 3323 to Byrnes, 7 July 1946......

Vietnam breaks off negotiations at Fontainebleau

on the grounds that France violated March 6

accord by convoking a new Dalat conference,

Caffrey 3801 to Byrnes, 2 August 1946.....-serncence

U.S. views recent moves by the French as de-
signed to regain a large measure of control

over Indochina in "violation of the spirit

of the 6 March convention" and that widespread
hostilities may result from Vietnamese resistance
to these encroachments. Memorandum by Moffat

(SRA) for Vincent (FEA), 9 August 19h6,...... han epees

U.S. views results of Dalat conference as a
reasonable basis for the future, but far short
of larger degree of independence desired by
Vietnam, and it is difficult "to foresee any
great degree success...so long as Cochin-China
stays apart from Vietnam..." Reed 342 to Brynes,

17 August 19h46..... ae fn eee Toe er ge P ot A ol

U.S. expresses concern over "French colonial
tendency picture U.S. as aggressive and imperisl-
istic" end indicates closeness of this unwitting
French colonial view to Communist Party line.
Clayton (Acting SecState) 240 to Saigon,

W September 1946. ..6.0..eeee spcalsiple ae bacayalcee aiinvanwalute, eralisvates

viii

TOP. SE

ee aS

revleteene ey eS

Se Cee aac

veanoae ~ 5

en ee 78

78

eenrene

CREE = Sensitive
