Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

war into perspective as only one of three fronts that required U.S.
attention (the other two being Japan-Korea ani India-Pakistan). In
the overall view, the DPM argued, long-run trends in Asia appeared

favorable to our interests:

The fact is that the trends in Asia today are running
mostly for, not against, our interests (witness Indonesia
and the Chinese confusion); there is no reason to be pessi-
mistic about our ability over the next decade or two to
fashion alliances and combinations (involving especially
Japan and India) sufficient to keep China from encroaching
too far. To the extent that our original intervention and
our existing actions in Vietnam were motivated by the
perceived need to draw the line against Chinese expansion-
ism in Asia, our objective has already been attained, and
COURSE B will suffice to consolidate it! 107/

With this perspective in mind the DPM went on to reconsider and restate
U.S. objectives in the Vietnam contest under the heading "Commitment
and Hopes Distinguished":

The time has come for us to eliminate the ambiguities
from our minimum objectives -- our commitments -- in
Vietnam. Specifically, two principles must be articulated,
and policies and actions brought in line with them: (1)
Our commitment is only to see that the people of South
Vietnam are permitted to determine their own future. (2) This
commitment ceases if the country ceases to help itself.

It follows that no matter how much we might hope for some
things, our commitment is not:

-~ to expel from South Vietnam regroupees, who
are South Vietnamese (though we do not like them),

-- to ensure that a particular person or group
remains in power, nor that the power runs to
every corner of the land (though we prefer
certain types and we hope their writ will run
throughout South Vietnam),

-- to guarantee that the self-chosen government is
: non-Communist (though we believe and strongly
hope it will be), and

-- to insist that the independent South Vietnam
remain separate from North Vietnam (though in the
short-run, we would prefer it that way).

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
