Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"Phen you have the possibility that many human beings pass under
a dictatorship that is inimical to the free world.

"Finally, you have broader considerations that might follow what
you would call the 'falling domino’ principle. You have a row of
dominoes set up, you knock over the first one, and what will heppen to
the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly. So you
could have a beginning of a disintegration that would have the most
profound influences.

"Now, with respect to the first one, two of the items from this
particular area that the world uses are tin and tungsten. They are
very important. There are others, of course, the rubber plantations
and so on.

"Then with respect to more people passing under this domination,
Asia, after all, has already lost some 450 million of its peoples to
the Communist dictatorship, and we simply can't afford greater losses.

"But when we come to the possible sequence of events, the loss of
Indochina, of Burma, of Thailand, of the Peninsula, and Indonesia
following, now you begin to talk about areas that not only multiply the
disadvantages that you would suffer through loss of materials, sources
of materials, but now you are talking really about millions and millions
and millions of people.

"Finally, the geographical position achieved thereby does many
things. It turns the so-called island defensive chain of Japan, Formosa,
of the Philippines and to the southward; it moves in to threaten
Australia and New Zealand.

"It takes away, in its economic aspects, that region that Japan
must have as a trading area or Japan, in turn, will have only one place
in the world to go -- that is, toward the Communist areas in order to
live.

"So, the possible consequences of the loss are just incalculable
to the free world."

a ea

"Q. Robert G. Spivack, New York Post: Mr. President, do you
agree with Senator Kennedy that independence must be guaranteed the
people of Indochina in order to justify an all-out effort there?

"THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't know, of course, exactly in what
way a Senator was talking about this thing.

"I will say this: for many years, in talking to different
countries, different governments, I have tried to insist on this
principle: no outside country can come in and be really helpful
unless it is doing something that the local people want.

B-11
