Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

overseas empire after the war. These U.S. commitments included the
August 2, 1941, official statement on the Franco-Japanese agreement;
a December, 1941, Presidential letter to Pétain; a March 2, 192,
statement on New Caledonia; a note to the French Ambassador of
April 13, 1942; Presidential statements and messages at the time

of the North Africa invasion; the Clark-Darlan Agreement of Novem-
ber 22, 1942; and a letter of the same month from the President's
Personal Representative to General Henri Giraud, which included

the following reassurance:

",..The restoration of France to full indepen-
dence, in all the greatness and vastness which it
possessed before the war in Europe as well as
overseas, is one of the war aims of the United
Nations. It is thoroughly understood that French
sovereignty will be re-established as soon as
possible throughout all the territory, metropoli-
tan or colonial, over which flew the French flag
in 1939." 1/

On the other hand, in the Atlantic Charter and other pronouncements
the U.S. proclaimed support for national self-determination and inde-
pendence. Moreover, the President of the United States, especially
distressed at the Vichy "sell-out" to Japan in Indochina, often cited
French rule there as a flagrant example of onerous and exploitative
colonialism, and talked of his determination to turn Indochina over
to an international trusteeship after the war. In early 1944, Lord
Halifax, the British Ambassador in Washington, called on Secretary
of State Hull to inguire whether the President's “rather definite"
statements "that Indo-china should be taken away from the French and
put under an international trusteeship" -- made to "Turks, Egyptians
and perhaps others" during his trip to Cairo and Teheran -- repre-
sented "final conclusions in view of the fact that they would soon
get back to the French..." 2/ (The French marked well the Presi-
dent's views -- in fact as France withdrew from Vietnam in 1956, its
Foreign Minister recalled Roosevelt's assuring the Sultan of Morocco
that his sympathies lay with colonial peoples struggling for inde-
pendence. 3/) Lord Halifax later recorded that:

|

| TOP SECRET - Sensitive

A-13
