Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

851G.01/74-1546: Cireular telegriim i
The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consuluy Officers *

@ At Bangkok, Batavia, Chungking, London, Monila, Paris. and The Tlague.
SECRET ~  Wasturxeron. April 18, 1946—1 p.m.
Viena Resubli ie's President Ho.Chi Minh re yuested US, UK and
other recognitions approximating French, recommition as free state
within French Union. UK informely replied unable recognize be-

ease negotiations re Vietnam actual status continiung, ro
Byrnes

8516.00 /4-2748% > Telecraim .
The Consul at Saigon (Reed) to Fa sleiahe of State
CONFIDENTIAL Sutcox, April 27, 146—11 a.m.
{Received April 29—2: 15 a. m.]
122. Mytel 121, April 27,10a.m. Returned yesterday from Hanoi

Not printed: for summary, see cirenlar telegram of April 0. Toa. m.. infrét.
where situztion tense. Called on all high French, Chinese, Vietnam
officials. He [77o?] dwelt largely on Cochin China issue, first, must
join Vietnam, second, French must cease entering Cochin China; he
also mentioned need for complete financial independence, own bank

and own bank note issue. Tle was highly indignant action of Freneh
in arresting and dispelling [eape?ling] from Dalat Dr. Thach, Cochin
Chinese delegate to Dalat conference. Tle expressed hope for future
if French lived wp to their agreenionts which he rather doubted but
added that outside help, cliefly capital and technical ih must be
supplied. 3

Pessimistic views held by al] French eran success of Dalat
conference whieh is now suspended for a few days while Vietnam
demands regarding Cochin (cease hostilities, release political internees
Armist ice Cemmission and political freedom) and French counter-
offer regarding atl Tndechina (establish special committee to investi-
gate Vietnam-French incidents) are being studied and that French
have now adopted thesis conference merely preliminary and Paris
appreval must be obtained which is contrary previous nuderstanding.
French defend arrest, expelling Dr. Thach on grounds that he is no-
torious enti-Frenel Cochin Chinese and that Cochin China not yet
part of Vietnam. i

French insistence withdrawal Chinese from north and all-over pro-
crastination to Dalat may have ulterior motives as it is not impossible
Freeh military coup may he brought off as soon as Chinese gone.
Some French civilians have spoken of this “as putting Vietnamese in
their place”. In any event over-all picture is uot happy one and
much compromise, good faith and tolerance needed to effect peaceful
settlement. :

Rrep
