Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Westmoreland answered: "The VC and DRV strength in SVN now totals ©

285,000 men. It appears that last month we reached the crossover point

in areas excluding the two northern provinces." (Emphasis added.)
"Attritions will be greater than additions to the force....The enemy has 8
divisions in South Vietnam. He has the capability of deploying 12 divisions
although he would have difficulty supporting all of these. He would be

hard pressed to support more than 12 divisions. If we add 2-1/2 divisions,
it is likely the enemy will react by adding troops." The President then
asked "At what point does the enemy ask for.volunteers?" Westmoreland's -
only reply was, "That is a good question." 53/

COMUSMACV briefly analyzed the strategy under the present program
of 470,000 men for the President. He explained his concept of a "meat-
grinder" where we would kill large numbers of the enemy but in the end
do little better than hold our own, with the shortage of troops still
restricting MACV to a fire brigade technique -- chasing after enemy main
force units when and where it could find them. He then predicted that
"unless the will of the enemy is broken or unless there was an unraveling
of the VC infrastructure the war could go on for 5 years. If our forces
were increased that period could be reduced although not necessarily in
proportion to increases in strength, since factors other than increase
in strength had to be considered. For instance, a non-professional force,
such as that which would result from fulfilling the requirement for 100,000
additional men by calling reserves, would cause come degradation of normal
leadership and effectiveness. Westmoreland concluded by estimating that
with a force level of 000 men, the war could well go on for three years.
With a second increment of 2-1/3 divisions leading to a total of 665,000 men,

it could go on for two years." 5

General Wheeler, who was present during the discussions, then inter-
jected his concern about the possibility that U.S. may face military threats
in other parts of the world simultaneous with an increase in strength in
Vietnam. He commented that the JCS was then reviewing possible responses
to threats in South Korea, Soviet pressure on Berlin, the appearence of
"volunteers" sent to Vietnam from Soviet Union, North Korea and Red China
and even overt intervention by Red China. Additionally, he listed three
matters more closely related to Vietnam which were bothering the JCS.

_ These were:

(a) DRV troop activity in Cambodia. US troops may be
forced to move against these units in Cambodia.

(b) DRV troop activity in Laos. US troops may be forced
to move against these units.

(c) Possible invasion of North Vietnam. We may wish to
take offensive action against the DRV with ground troops. 55/

TOP SECRET = Sensitive
83
