Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and purpose of such U,S, intervention, it is not hard to understand the
DPM's statement that, “This memorandum is written at a time when there
appears to be nce attractive course of action." 101/ Nevertheless,
lgliternatives' was precisely what the DPM had been written to suggest.
These were introduced with a recapitulation of where we stood militarily
and what the Chiefs were recommending. With respect to the war in the
North, the DPM stated:

Against North Vietnam, an expansion of the bombing
program (ROLLING THUNDER 56) was approved mid-April. Before
it was approved, General Wheeler said, "The bombing campaign
is reaching the point where we will have struck all worth-
while fixed targets except the ports. At this time we will
have to address the requirement to deny the DRV the use of
the ports." With its approval, excluding the port areas,
no major military targets remain to be struck in the North.
All that remains are minor targets, restrikes of certain
major targets, and armed reconnaissance of the lines of com-
munication (LOCs) -- and, under new principles, mining the
harbors, bombing dikes and locks, and invading North Vietnam
with land armies. These new military moves against North
Vietnam, together with land movements into Laos and Cambodia,
are now under consideration by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 102/

The broad alternative courses of action it considered were
two?

COURSE A. Grant the request and intensify military

actions outside the South -- especially against the North.

Add a minimum of 200,000 men -- 100,000 (2-1/3 division plus

5 tactical air squadrons) would be deployed in FY 1968, another
100,000 (2-1/3 divisions and 8 tactical air squadrons) in FY
1969, and possibly more later to fulfill the JCS ultimate
requirement for Vietnam and associated world-wide contingencies.
Accompanying these force increases (as spelled out below) would
be greatly intensified military actions outside South Vietnam --
including in Lacs and Cambodia but especially against the North.

COURSE B. Limit force increases to no more than 30,000;
avoid extending the ground conflict beyond the borders of
South Vietnam; and concentrate the bombing on the infiltration
routes souch of 20°. Unless the military situation worsens
dramatically, add no more than 9 battalions of the approved
program of 87 battalions. This course would result in a level
of no more than 500,000 men (instead of the currently planned
470,000) on December 31, 1968. (See Attachment IV for details.)
A part of this course would be a termination of bombing in
the Red River basin unless military necessity required it,
and a concentration of all. sorties in North Vietnam on the

hh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
