SO

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Just as the geographical extent of the bombing would
inexorably increase, Ball argued, so would the value of the targets
struck. “Unless_we achieve dramatic successes in the South -- which
no one expects [Ball wrote] -- we wilt be led by frustration to hit
increasingly more sensitive targets. He listed four categories of
likely operations: (1) the mining of Haiphong harbor, and the destruc-
tion of (2) North Vietnam's POL supplies, (3) its system of power
stations, and (4) its airfields. Each of these targets had already
been recommended to the President by one of his principal military or
civilian advisors in Washington or Saigon, Ball noted, and each had
"a special significance for the major Communist capitals.' The mining
of Haiphong harbor would "impose a major decision" on the Soviet Union.
"Could it again submit to a blockade, as at the time of the Cuban missile
erisis," Ball asked, "or should it retaliate by sending increased aid or
even volunteers to North Viet-Nam or by squeezing the United States at
some other vital point, such as Berlin?" Would Hanoi feel compelled
to launch some kind of attack on crowded Saigon harbor or on U.S. fleet
units -- perhaps using surface-to-surface missiles provided by the
Soviet Union? Similarly, the bombing of North Vietnam's POL supplies
might bring in response an attack on the exposed POL in Saigon harbor.
Then there were the airfields. Ball wrote:

’ The bombing of the airfields would very likely lead
the DRV to request the use of Chinese air bases north of
the border forthe basing of North Vietnamese planes, or
even to request the intervention of Chinese air. This
would pose the most agonizing dilemma for us. Consistent
with our decision to bomb the North, we could hardly per-
mit the creation of a sanctuary from which our own planes
could be harassed. Yet there is general agreement that
for us to bomb China would very likely lead to a direct
war with Peiping and would -- in principle at least 7
trigger the Sino-Soviet Defense Pact, which has been in
force for fifteen years.

The same process of action-reaction, Ball noted, would
~ also apply to surface-to-air missile sites (SAMs) within North Vietnam.
The wider the bombing the greater the number of SAM sites we manned sub-
stantially by Soviet and Chinese technicians -- the North Vietnamese
would install.’ "As more SAMs are installed, we will be compelled to
take them out in order to safeguard our aircraft. This will mean
killing more Russians and Chinese and putting greater pressure on those
two nations for increased effort. Ball summarized this process in

ral terms: "Hach extension of our bombing to more sensitive areas
ed increase the risk to our aircraft and compel a further extension
be enor +o protect the expanded bombing activities we have staked

out." :

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
