Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

on
C*

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Nevertheless, I desire and expect a detailed, line-by-line
analysis of these requirements to determine that each is truly
essential to the carrying out of our war plan. We must send to
Vietnam what is needed, but only what is needed. Excessive
deployments weaken our ability to win by undermining the eco-
nomic structure of the RVN and by raising doubts concerning the
soundness of our planning.

In the course of your review of the validity of the require-
ments, I would like you to consider the attached Deployment
Issue Papers which were prepared by my staff. While there may
be sound reasons for deploying the units questioned, the issues
raised in these papers merit your detailed attention and specific
reply. They probably do not cover all questionable units, par-
ticularly for proposed deployments for the PACOM area outside of
SVN. I expect that you will want to query CINCPAC about these
and other units for which you desire clarification.

I appreciate the time required to verify the requirements
and determine our capability to meet them, but decisions must
be made on a timely basis if units are to be readied and equip-
ment and supplies procured. Therefore I would appreciate having
your recommended deployment plan, including your comments on
see of the Deployment Issue Papers, no later than 15 September
1965.

Enclosures Sgd: ROBERT S. McNAMARA 4/

The items questioned in the Issue Papers totalled approximately
70,000 troops with artillery and air defense providing the two largest
single items.

4h. The "Quick Fix"

While the JCS were beginning their review of the items questioned
by the Secretary of Defense, they attempted to secure a "quick fix" in the
form of a message from General Westmoreland. General Westmoreland evalu-
ated the 1966 and 1967 force requirements as follows:

++-Continuous study of the situation indicates that past and
current developments reinforce my appraisal of the war on which
the CY 66-67 force requirements were based. There are no indi-
cations that the enemy has reduced his resolve. He has increased
his rate of infiltration, formed Division size units, introduced
new weapons into his ranks, maintained lines of communications
leading into South Vietnam, increased his use of Cambodia as a
Safehaven, and recently moved a combat division through the DMZ.
