Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Soviet interlocutors talked at length about President
Kennedy's forebearance post-Cube period and broadly implied
that Soviets now interested in reciprocating such forebear-
ance. It was clear from their remarks thet Soviets assume
we would welcome some avenue of withdrawal so long as this
would not involve loss of American prestige.

Soviets informed Salinger that Soviet Government had
received a “Rusk proposal” with regard Vietnam but would not
answer proposal or act on it in any way until Soviet Govern-
ment had some idea as to how current exercise with Salinger
would turn out...

As to mechanics of carrying on exercise, Sagatelyan
suggested Salinger might convey proposal to US Government
through embassy Paris and he himself would fly immediately
Paris in order receive from Salinger there any official
reaction. Alternatively, if Salinger wished to proceed
direct Washington, contact -could be designated there,
probably either Zinchuk (Soviet embassy counselor) or
Vadvichenko (TASS Washington Bureau).

Throughout conversation Soviets made clear to Salinger
that because of sensitive Soviet position any progress
_toward political settlement Vietnam problem must be initiated
and carried through, at least in preliminary stages, cn basis
unofficial contacts, clear implication being if leak should
occur or if scheme should go awry, Soviet Government would
be in position disavow whole affair. At same time, it was
clear from remarks as well as presence of Foreign Office
representative that proposal by Sagatelyan had official
backing.

Salinger had one further contact with Segatelyen and Vassily the
following day, where it became apparent that the Soviet officials’
interest in the proposal had waned. By the time Salinger had returned
to Washington and saw Ambassador Thompson at the State Department on
May 18, the Soviet disinterest in any role for themselves during the
current bombing pause had been made clear through other channels, and
Salinger's contacts were not further pursued.

Of these other channels, the most important (and also the most
casual) was @ brief Kaffeeklatsch between Secretary Rusk and Foreign
Minister Gromyko at the Austrian Chancellor's residence in Vienna on
Mey 15. The proceedings ere described in a Rusk cable wt/ to
Undersecretary Bell as follows:

Have just returned from Chancellor's lunch for visiting

digniteries. After lunch Gromyko and I and our wives were
at a small table for coffee. I commented to Gromyko thet we

12h, - MOP SECRET - Sensitive
