Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

One other consideration may have entered into the President's bomb-
ing pause calculus at this time. On April 5, a TROJAN HORSE photography
mission had revealed the first SA-2 SAM site under construction fifteen
miles SSE of Hanoi, confirming the long-rumored shipment of Soviet
surface-to-air missiles to North Vietnam. 121/ Moreover, the SAMs
were only the most dramatic form of considerably increased quantities _
of modern military equipment beginning to be furnished to the DRV by
the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union was now in the process of becoming
visibly committed to assisting North Vietnam in resisting U.S. attacks
on its territory, and a more direct confrontation of US and USSR military
force was rapidly approaching, Indeed, the Joint Chiefs had indicated,
on April 14, their desire to obtain approval for air strikes ageinst the
sites on short notice as they become orerational, had estimated, on
May 6, that the first site construction could be completed by May 15,
and had instructed CICPAC to commence planning to conduct air strikes
against that site. 122/ A decision involving a major Soviet "flashpoint;
therefore, would soon have to be faced, and the President may well have
wished to provide a orior opportunity for a quiet Hanoi backdown, before
proceeding with more forceful military activity.

B. - Setting the Stege

On the evening of May 10 the President sent a personal FLiSi
message to Ambassador Teylor, 123/ informing him that he (the President)
had decided to call a brief halt to air attacks in the North and instruct-
ing him to obtain Premier Quat's agreement to the plan. The text of the
message follows:

T have learned from Bob McNamara that nearly all ROLLING
THUNDER operations for this week can be completed by Wednesdey
noon, Washington time. This fact and the days of Buddha's
birthday seem to me to provide an excellent opportunity for a
pause in air attacks which might go into next week and which I
could use to good effect with world opinion.

My plen is not to announce this brief pause but simply to
call it privately to the attention of Moscow and Hanoi as soon
as possible end tell them that we shall be watching closely to
see whether they respond in eny way. My current plan is to
report publicly after the pause ends on what we have done.

Could you see Quat right evey on Tuesday and see if you
cen persuade him to concur in this plan. I would like to
associate him with me in this decision if possible, but I
would accept a simple coneurrence or even willingness not to
oppose my decision. In general, I think it important that he
and I should act together in such matters, but I have no desire
to emberrass him if it is politically difficult for him to join

actively in a pause over Buddhats birthday.

110 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
