Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in Asia without an.expression of specific Congressional approval. In
response, Senator Fulbright stated that he did not believe that the Resolu-
tion changed in any way the Administration's concept of keeping the
conflict in Vietnam as limited as possible. He identified the purposes
of the Resolution as being only (1) "to make it clear that the Congress
approves the action taken by the President to meet the attack on U.S.
forces...." and (2) to declare support for the resolute policy enunciated
by the President in order to prevent further aggression, or to retaliate
with suitable measures should such aggression take place." 4a/ However,
in subsequent discussion it was made clear that preventing or retaliating
against further aggression was interpreted rather broadly at the time:

"(Mr. Cooper) ...are we now giving the President advance
authority to take whatever action he may deem necessary res-
pecting South Vietnam and its defense, or with respect to the
defense of any other country included in the /SEATO/ treaty?

"(Mr. Fulbright) I think that is correct.

"(Mr. Cooper) Then, looking ahead, if the President
decided that it was necessary to use such force as could lead
into war, we will give that authority by this resolution?

"(Mr. Fulbright) ‘That is the way I would interpret it.
If a situation later developed in which we thought the approval
should be withdrawn it could be withdrawn by concurrent resolu-
tion." he/

The Congressional Resolution had several intended audiences. First,
it was aimed at the communist powers who might not believe the President
would risk legislative debate over strong military actions in an election
year. Second, it was intended to reassure our allies, particularly in
Asia, who might doubt the ability of the President to rally the necessary
public resolve should stronger military measures be needed. Finally it
was directed at the U.S, public, whose appreciation of national interests
in Southeast Asia might be strengthened through observation of combined
executive-legislative and bipartisan political support. 43/

The United Nations was the target of a separate statement, on
> August, as Ambassador Stevenson described the events in the Gulf for
members of the Security Council and specifically related the DRV provoca-
tion to the wider campaign of terror and infiltration occurring in South
Vietnam and laos. a This address was designed to establish the
legitimacy of our actions in the Gulf under vrovisions of the UN Charter
and to reaffirm that U.S. policy in Southeast Asia had limited aims and
wes based on upholding provisions of existing international agreements.

The third communication was directed specifically to Hanoi, on
10 August, through the Canadian I.C.C. representative and was intended
to strengthen the warning which he conveyed on his initial visit. In

ae TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘
