Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

47

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the North after the extended December-January pause when Senator
Fulbright opened hearings by his Senate Foreign Relations Committee

into the Vietnem war. Witnesses who took varying degrees of exception
to U.S. policy as they testified in early February included former
Ambassador George Kennan and retired General James Gavin. Secretary
Rusk appeared on February 18 and defended U.S. involvement as a fulfill-
ment of our SHATO obligations. In a stormy confrontation with Fulbright
the Secretary repeatedly reminded the Senator of his support for the
1964 Tonkin Gulf Resolution. The next day, Senator Robert Kennedy stated
that the NLF should be included in any postwar South Vietnamese govern-
ment. Three days later, he clarified his position by saying that he had
meant the NLF should not be "automatically excluded" from power in an
interim government pending elections. Speaking no doubt for the Presi-
dent and the Administration, the Vice President pointedly rejected
Kennedy's suggestion on February 21. On the other side of the political
spectrum, Senator Russell, otherwise a hawk on the war, reacted in April
to the continuing political turmoil in South Vietnam by suggesting a
poll be taken in all large Vietnamese cities to determine whether our
assistance was still desired by the Vietnamese. If the answer was no,
he asserted, the U.S. should pull out of Vietnam.

The President was also regularly reminded by the press of
the possible implications for the November Congressional elections of a
continuing large effort in South Vietnam that did not produce results.
Editorial writers were often even more pointed. On May 17, James Reston
wrote:

President Johnson has been confronted for some time
with a moral question in Vietnam, but he keeps evading it.
The question is this: What justifies more and more killing
in Vietnam when the President's own conditions for an effec-
tive war effort -- a government that can govern and fight in
Saigon -- are not met?

By his own definition, this struggle cannot succeed
without a regime that commands the respect of the South
Vietnamese people and a Vietnamese army that can pacify the
country. Yet though the fighting qualities of the South
Vietnamese are now being demonstrated more and more against
one another, the President's orders are sending more and more
Americans into the battle to replace the Vietnamese who are
fighting among themselves. 146/

Public reaction to the simmering political crisis in South Vietnam was
reflected in declining popular approvel of the President's performance.
In March, 68%, of those polled had approved the President's conduct in

office, but by May, his support had declined sharply to only 54%. 147/

116 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
