Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRIM! - Sensitive

In the early afternoon, Colonel Tung, who had been arrested on the
morning of November 1, was forced to call his speciel forces end tell
them to surrender to the coun forces. lot long thereafter, the adjacent
special forces headquarters fell to the coup wits efter a brief skir-~
mish. When this occurred, the palace was reduced for its defense to
the palace guard, since the remainder of the special forces were outside
the city and effectively cub of f from it, and all other unit commanders
had come under the command of officers involved in the coup. General Ceo,
the IV Corps commander, pledged his support to the coup in the late after-
noon, although it is not clear whether this was opportunistic or whether
he thought the coup was really Phase I of Nhu's plan. Not trusting him,
however, the generals placed him under guard. At 4:30 p.m., the generals
went on the radio to announce the coup and demand the resignation of Dien
and Yihu. 9/ This was followed by a continuing broadcast of the pledges
of support of the senior officers that had been recorded that morning.
Meanwhile, Air Force transports were dropping prepsred leaflets announc-
ing the coup, and calling on the populace to support it.

At the beginning, Diem and Nhu were apparently fooled by the coup,
or hed completely miscalculated the extent of its support. At the first
indications of coup actions, Mhu reportedly assured an alarmed official
thet it was all a part of a palace plen. 10/ When word reached the
palace that all key points hed fallen, Nhu tried to contact General Dinh.
When he could not reach him, he realized that he had been outfoxed and
that the coup was genuine. By this time, fighting was going on between
the coup forces end the palace guard at the palace and the nearby guard
barracks. When the genérals called the two brothers and asked them to
surrender, promising them safe conduct out of the country, Diem replied
by asking them to come to the palace for "consultations," an obvious
attempt to repeat the 1960 tactic of delaying the coup long enough for
loyel troops to reach the city. The generals, however, were not bar-
gaining -- they were demanding.

At 4:30 p.m., Diem called Ledge to ask where he stood and the follow-
ing conversation ensued: ‘

Diem: Some units have made a rebellion and I want to know what
is the attitude of the US?

lodge: I do not feel well enough informed to be able to tell you.
I have heard the shooting, but am not acquainted with all
the facts. Also it is 4:30 a.m. in Washington and the US
Government cannot possibly have a view.

Diem: But you must have some general ideas. After all, I am
a Chief of State. I have tried to do my duty. I went
to do now what duty and good sense require. I believe
in duty ebove all. '

ue TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
