Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

" ..,I wonder, now, if we are still fighting the same war with
Communist China that we were fighting in Korea; is that really the enemy?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, the present enemy on the ground is North ~
Viet-Nam and infiltration from North Viet-Nam, as far as we are con-
cerned. This appeal by the Liberation Front to Hanoi and Hanoi's res-
ponse to it simply rebeats the factual situation. Hanoi has been sending
tens of thousands of men and large quantities of arms into South Viet-
Nam. This is not new.

"Now, in terms of the more general problem, as you know, there have
been very important disputes within the Communist world, and specifically
between Moscow and Peiping, on the question of strategy and tactics in
promoting the world revolution. Moscow has been more prudent, more
cautious in this respect. Peiping has announced a doctrine of militancy
which has caused great problems even within the Communist world. Now,
if Peiping should discover that a doctrine of militancy is a successful
policy through what happens to Southeast Asie, then the dangers through-
out the rest of the world mount very quickly and very substantially."

* %* *
"7.5. Commitment Fundamental to Peace

"Mr. Reasoner: Secretary Rusk, I think Americans Sometimes havye--
while they support this policy-~have trouble understanding just what we
mean when we speak in the pattern of having to defend it here or we will
have to fight in some less suitable place. To be hypothetical, what
would happen if Secretary McNamara announced that we had done all we
could and we were now withdrawing because we needed the boys at home and
we left? What do you think would ensue?

."Secretary Rusk: I think that it would not be for me to answer
that one directly. But imagine yourself to be a Thai, and ask what the
American commitment to Thailand would mean to you under those circum-
stances. Think of your self as a West Berliner, and ask yourself what
the American commitment to you would mean under those circumstances.

"At the very heart, gentlemen, of the maintenance of peace in the
world is the integrity of the American commitment under our alliances.

"Mr. Kendrick: Is it possible that it is an overcommitment?

"Secretary Rusk: Well, that can be argued. But it should have
been argued at the time, at the various stages. I personally do not
think so, because we have made 42 allies, as you know, in this postwar
period, and at the time it seemed to be in the vital interest of the
United States that these alliances be formed.”

ea a

*

D-57
