Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

drafting the proposals, But where the American proposals were for train-
ing whole South Vietnamese divisions, Diem said the training centers

would be for combat leaders and technical specialists. Consequently, it
seems that Diem did not have the same thing in mind in referring to "“selec-
ted elements of the American Armed Forces" as did McGarr and others
interested in bringing in American combat units. It may be that

Diem agreed to put in this request that sounded like what McGarr wanted

as a concession to the Americans in return for support of the large in-
crease in the RVNAF he was asking.

Presumably this was clarified during the discussions Thuan had after
delivering the letter, But, as noted earlier, we have no record of the
conversations, In any event, nothing came of the proposal.

(A summary of Dien's letter, cabled to the American mission in Saigon
the day after the letter was received in Washington, did not use the
phrase "selected elements of the American Armed Forces." Instead it said
that Diem asked for an increase of "American personnel" to establish the
training centers, The crucial issue, of course, was whether Americans
would be sent to Vietnam in the form of organized combat units, capable of,
if not explicitly intended, for conducting combat operations. We do not
know whether the wording of the summary reflected Thuan's clarification
of the proposal when he arrived in Washington,or a high level Administra-
tion decision to interpret Diem's letter as not asking for combat units,
or merely sloppy drafting of the cable.)

It seems clear that either Diem (despite the language of the letter
he signed) really did not want American units, or that Kennedy (despite
the activity of his subordinates) did not want to send those units, or both.

Sorenson, in his memoir, says that in May Kennedy decided against
sending combat units despite the recommendations he received at the time
of the Task Force Report. But his account of the Task Force is in error
on a number of details, and so it is hard to know how much to credit his
recollection, 12/

But there is a final item apparently from this period that seems to
support Sorenson. It is a handwritten undated note on 4 piece of scratch
paper from Rostow to McNamara. It looks like a note passed at a meeting.
From its location in the file, it was probably written about June 5,
that is, a few days before Thuan arrived with Diem's letter. It reads:

Bob:

We must think of the kind of forces and missions
for Thailand now, Vietnam later.

We need a guerrilla deterrence operation in
Thainland's northeast,

67
’ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
