Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The crisis of confidence that developed was one reason for the
_lack of a U.S, response to the bombing of the Brink BOQ in Saigon- on
Christmas Eve. As pointed out earlier, it was the kind of incident which
had been contemplated in the approved Phase I guidelines as warranting a
U.S. reprisal action, and the JCS did recommend such an action. They pro-
posed an immediate air strike against Vit Thu Iu army barracks just north
of the 17th parallel, employing up to 40 aircraft sorties, with Vietnamese
participation if feasible. It was to be a one-day strike, on a much smaller
scale than those recommended by the JCS on earlier occasions. 9/ However,
both because of the unsettled situation in Vietnam and because of the
Christmas Season--which caught the President and the Secretary of Defense
out of town and Congress in recess--Washington was hesitant and reluctant
to press for a prompt reaction. By the time the issue was discussed with
the President on 29 December, it seemed too late for an event-associated
reprisal and the decision was negative.

In the meantime, GVN forces had experienced major reverses. ARVN
-as well as the Regional and Popular Forces had been seriously weakened by
defeat and desertions in the last few months of 1964. A highly visible
setback occurred from 26 December to 2 January 1965 at Binh Gia, where the
ve virtually destroyed two Vietnamese Marine battalions. Viet Cong strength,
augmented by infiltrating combat forces from North Vietnam, increased, and
their hit-and-run tactics were increasingly successful.

The government of Tran Van Huong came to an abrupt end on 27 Janu-
ary 1965 when the Vietnamese Armed Forces Council ousted him, leaving only a
facade of civilian government. The continuing power struggle clearly
impeded military operations. Large elements of VNAF, for example, were
maintained on constant "coup alert." 10/

Washington reacted to these developments with considerable anguish.
"I think we must accept that Saigon morale in all quarters is now very shaky
indeed...." wrote Assistant Secretary of State William P. Bundy on Janu-
ary 6, and he continued:

4

We have not yet been able to assess the overall impact of
the continuing political crisis and of the Binh Gia military
defeat, but there are already ample indications that they have
had a sharp discouraging effect just in the last two weeks. By
the same token, it is apparent that Hanoi is extremely confident,
and that the Soviets are being somewhat tougher and the Chinese
Communists are consolidating their ties with Hanoi...they see
Vietnam falling into their laps in the fairly near future....The
sum total of the above seems to us to point...to a prognosis that
the situation in Vietnam is now likely to come apart more rapidly
than we had anticipated’in November. ir/

A similarly gloomy view was taken by Assistant Secretary of Defense
John McNaughton. Ina February 1965 memorandum (no exact date), 12} he
characterized the situation as "deteriorating":

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
