Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This initial official signal to prepare to expand the war was
cast against a conviction that U.S. objectives in South Vietnam were
critically important:

We seek an independent non-Communist South Vietnam.
We do not require that it serve as a Western base or as a
member of a Western Alliance. South Vietnam must be free,
however, to accept outside assistance as required to maintain
its security. This assistance should be able to take the
form not only of economic and social measures but also police
and military help to root out and control insurgent elements.

Unless we can achieve this objective in South Vietnam,
almost all of Southeast Asia will probably fall under Communist
dominance (a11 of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia), accommodate to
Communism so as to remove effective U.S. and anti-Communist
influence (Burma), or fall under the domination of forces not
now explicitly Commmist but likely then to become so (Indonesia
taking over Malaysia). Thailand might hold for a period with
our help, but would be under grave pressure. Even the Philippines
would become shaky, and the threat to India to the west, Australia
and New Zealand to the south, and Taiwan, Korea, and Japan to the

north and east would be greatly increased.

All of these consequences would probably have been true
even if the U.S. had not since 1954, and especially since 1961,
become so heavily engaged in South Vietnam. However, that fact
accentuates the impact of a Communist South Vietnam not only
in Asia, but in the rest of the world, where the South Vietnam
conflict is regarded as a test case of U.S. capacity to help a
nation meet a Communist "war of liberation."

Thus, purely in terms of foreign policy, the stakes are
high....

The situation has unquestionably been growing worse, at
least since September:

1. In terms of goverment control of the country-
side, about 40% of the territory is under Viet Cong
control or predominant influence. In 22 of the 3
provinees, the Viet Cong control 50% or more of the
land area, including 80% of Fhuoc Tuy; 90% of Binh
Duong; 75% of Hau Nghia; 90% of Long An; 90% of Kien
Tuong; 90% of Dinh Tuong; 90% of Kien Hoa; and 85%
of An Xuyen.

2. large groups of the population are now showing
signs of apathy and indifference, and there are some
signs of frustration within the U.S. contingent:

a. The ARVN and paramilitary desertion rates,

39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
