Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the country was electric. It was clear that Lyndon Johnson, the master
politician, had been successfully challenged, not by an attractive and
appealing alternative vote-getter, but by a candidate who had been able
+o mobilize and focus all the discontent and disillusionment about the
war. National politics in the election year 1968 would not be the same
thereafter.

Critics of the President's policies in Vietnam in both parties were
puoyed by the New Hampshire results. But for Senator Robert Kennedy
they posed a particularly acute dilemma. With the President's vulner-
ability on Vietnam now demonstrated, should Kennedy, his premier political
opponent on this and other issues, now throw his hat in the ring? After
four days of huddling with his advisers, and first informing both the
President and Senator McCarthy, Kennedy announced his candidacy on March 16.
For President Johnson, the threat was now real. McCarthy, even in the
flush of a New Hampshire victory, could not reasonably expect to unseat
the incumbent President. But Kennedy was another matter. The President
now faced the prospect of a long and divisive battle for renomination
within his own party against a very strong contender, with the albatross
of an unpopular war hanging around his neck.

For the moment at least, the President appeared determined.
On March 17, he spoke to the National Farmers' Union and said that the
trials of American responsibility in Vietnam would demand a period of
domestic "austerity" and a "total national effort." 53/ Further leaks,
however, were undercuting his efforts to picture the Administration as
firm and resolute about doing whatever was necessary. On March 17, the
New York Times had again run a story on the debate within the Administra-
tion. This time the story stated that the 206,000 figure would not be
approved but that something between 35,000 and 50,000 more troops would
be sent to Vietnam, necessitating some selective call-up of reserves. 5h/
Again the reporters were disturbingly accurate in their coverage. Criti-
cism of the President continued to mount. Spurred by the New Hampshire
4ndications of massive public disaffection with the President's policy,
139 members of the House of Representatives co-authored a resolution
calling for a complete reappraisal of U.S. Vietnam policy including a
Congressional review.

3. ISA Attempts to Force a Decision

The President's reluctance to make a decision about Vietnam
‘and the dramatic external political developments in the U.S. kept the
members of the Administration busy in a continuing round of new draft
proposals and further meetings on various aspects of the proposals the
President was considering. Within ISA at the Pentagon, attention focused
on ways to get some movement on the negotiations in the absence of any

186 TOP SECRET - ‘Sensitive
