Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

However, just as we can control our aircraft losses,
there is clear evidence that the enemy has considerable
control over his ground force losses. He is hurt most often
when he chooses to assault U.S. forces (e.g., Junction City).
On large operations, stealth is impossible. Consequently
over 90% of the large firefights that develop in such opera-
tions are initiated by the enemy, and in over 80% of the
cases there is a clear indication of a planned enemy attack.
The enemy can probably hold his losses (a11 causes) to about
2000 per week regardless of our force levels or operations.
Additional forces cannot defeat him so long as he has the
will, some popular support and we lack timely intelligence.

Additional forces will not help the pacification
task measurably. This cannot be accomplished with 480,000
or 560,000 U.S, military forces and probably not at all
without (1) a far more effective Revolutionary Develop-
ment (RD) program supported by Vietnamese forces and (2) a
more stable and progressive GVN, both of which will require
patience and emphasis on political-economic objectives
rather than military ones. It is clear from the USMC exper-
jience in I CTZ that U.S. forces ean deny VC control but cannot
secure the population. There were fewer people in the
"secured" category in I CTZ at the end of CY 66 than at the
beginning.

- Our experience in Operation FATRFAX just west and south
of Saigon further supports the conclusion that in spite of
good intentions and good actions, the U.S. military cannot
undertake pacification and expect to withdraw after a short
period, leaving the area secure. In FAIRFAX, still being
conducted, 3 U.S. battalions were "temporarily" deployed
with 3 ARVN battalions to secure the area near Saigon. The
U.S. battalions are still engaged ak months longer than
planned and will be for the foreseeable future. Fewer than
1 VC per U.S. battalion-equivalent per day has been killed,
most of the VC infrastructure has temporarily moved out of
the area but has not been captured, the U.S. has made many
friends (but of unknown longevity), the ARVN made few
friends and actually look worse than before, after compari-
son with the Americans, and the populace in general are
reserving judgment until they know the VC have left per-
manently. Part of the reason for ARVN ineffectiveness is
lack of supplies and support-items (e.g., barbed wire) which
the U.S. troops had in ample supply. We would be much
better off to provide the GVN with such supplies rather than
deploy additional U.S. forces.

108 TOP SECRET - Sensitive -

.
