Ocdassilied per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vol,.) 
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968 
(16 Vol,.) 
8. Re-cmphasis on Pacification: 1965-1967 
,.. 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: 
NO 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
• 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
IV . c. 8 . 
RE-E·lPllASIS Oll PACIFlCATI011: 
1965 - 1967 
• 
0290) . 
• L.-. _______ _ 
Occlassificd per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;J\c: 2011 
-
• 
DI. C. ll. 
Declassified per EXCI.'utlve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The United States Re-Emwhasizes Pacification - 1965 to Present 
An Examination of a l-1ajor Trend in our Effort 
SUMMARY 
By the smnmer of 1967, pacification had become a major ingredient 
of Americ~~ strategy in Vietnam, growing steadily in importance and the 
amount of resources devoted to it. The U.S. Mission in Vietnam had been 
reorganized three times in 15 months and each reorganization had been 
designed primarily to improve the management of the pacification effort 
and raise its priority within our overall effort. 
Pacification -- or as it is sometimes called by Americans , Revolu-
tionary Development (RD) -- had staged a comeback in priority from the 
days in 1964 and 1965 when it ",as a program with little emphasis, 
guidance, or support . It has by no\« almost equalled in priority for the 
Americans the original priority given the Strategic Hamlet program in 
1962-1963, although the Vietnamese have not yet convinced many people 
that they attach the same importance to it as we do . 
This study traces the climb in pacification ' s importance during the 
last two years , until it reached its present level of importance , with 
further growth likely. 
This study concentrates on American decisions, American discussions, 
American papers . It will be clear to the reader that , if this version 
of events is accurate , the Vietnamese played a secondery role in the 
move to re-emphasize pacification . It is the contention of this paper 
that this was indeed the case, and that the Americans were the prime 
movers. in the series of events which led to the re - emphasis of pacifica-
t ion. 
This study does not cover many important events , particularly the 
progress of the field effort , the CIA-backed PAT/Cadre program, and GYrI 
activity. 
The process by which the Anerican government came to increase its 
support for pacification is disorderly and haphazard . 
Individuals like 
Ambassador Lodge and General Halt and Robert Komer, seem in r etrospect 
to have played important roles, but to each participant in a story still 
unfolding, the sequence may look different . Therefore , it is quite 
possible that things didn ' t quite happen the way they are described here , 
and soneoce else , whose actions are not adeque.tely described in the fjles 
available for this study, was equally important. 
Nor was there anything resembling a conspiracy involved. 
Indeed, 
the proponents of what is called so loosely in this paper tlpacification" 
were often in such violent disagreement as to what pacification meant 
i 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Execullve Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dolle: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
that they quarreled publicly among themselves and overlooked their 
common interests . 
At other t~es, people who disagreed strongly on 
major issues found themselves temporary allies with a common objective . 
Moreover , there is the curious problem of the distance bet,,"een 
rhetoric and reality. 
Even during the dark days of 1964-1965 , most 
Americans paid lip service , particularly in official, on the record 
statements , to the ultimate importance of pacification . 
But their 
public affirmation of the cliches about "winning the hearts and minds 
of the people" uere not related to any progra...'lls or priorities then in 
existence in Vietnam, and they can mislead the casual observer . 
The resurgence of pacification 'Has dramatically punctuated by 
three Presidential conferences on Pacif'ic islands 'tdth the leaders of 
the CWN -- HonoluJ.u in February, 1966, Manila in October , 1966 (with 
five other Chiefs of State also present) , and Guem in r,iarch, 1967 . 
After each conference the relative importance of pacification took 
another leap upward "lithin the U. S. Government - - reflecting a success-
ful effort within the U. S. Government by its American proponents - - and 
the U. S. tied the GVrI onto Decf.arations end Communiques ~lhich canmitted 
them to greater effort. 
In addition , each conference ",as followed by a major re-organiza-
tion within the U. S. Mission, designed primarily to improve our manage -
ment of the pacification effort . 
Arter Honolulu, Deputy Ambassador 
Porter 'I'as given broad ne'" authority to run the civilian agencies . 
After Nanila , Porter ''las directed to re -organize the components of USIA, 
CIA, and AID internally to create a single Office of Civil Operations 
(OCO) . 
And after Guam, OCO -- redesignated as CORDS -- ,·ras put under 
the control of General Hestooreland, "ho was given a civilian deputy with 
the personal rank of Ambassador to assist him . 
The l ow priority of pacification in 1965 was the understandable 
result of a situation in which battles of unprecedented size "'ere tak-
ing place in the higbla.11.ds and along the coast, the air war ''las moving 
slowly north to\>lards Hanoi , and the GVN was in a continual state of 
disarray . 
But a series of events and distinct themes ... ,ere a.t work which would 
converge to give pacification a bigher priority. 
They were to meet at 
the Honolulu conference in February, 1966. 
11 
TOP SECHET - Sensitive 
Oeclassified per E;,\ecu\1vc Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316, By: 'WO Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1. Threads That Met At Honolulu 
A. 
Hop Tac 
The first w~s the hold-over program from 1964-1965 -- pacification's 
one priority even then, the Hop Tac program. It had been suggested first 
by L¢dge on his way home from his first Ambassadorship, and Taylor and 
Westmoreland had given it recognition as a high priority program. 
Although 
Westmoreland judged it repeatedly as a partial success , i t appears now to 
have been a faultily conceived and clumsily executed program. It was con-
ceptually unsound, lacked the support of the Vietnamese, created disagree-
ments within the U.S. Mission which were never resolved, and then faded 
away. 
So unsuccessful was it that during its life span the VC were able 
to organize a regiment -- l 65A -- in the Gia Dinh area surl'ounding Saigon, 
and thus forced MACV in l ate 1966 to commit three U.S . infantry battalions 
to Operation FAIRFAX to protect the capital . 
No one analyzed Hop Tac 
before starting FAIRFAX . tHth the beginning of FAIRFAX , Hop Tae was buried 
quietly and the United states proceeded to other matters . 
B. 
Ambassador Lodge and the True Believers 
Henry Cabot Lodge returned as Ambassador in August of 1965, and im-
mediately began to talk of pacification as lithe heart of' the matter . II In· 
telegrams and Mission Council meetings , Lodge told the President, the GVN , 
and the Mission that pacification deserved a higher priority. 
Because he 
saw himself as an advocate before the President for his beliefs r ather 
than as the overall manager of the largest overseas civil-military effort 
in Arlerican history, * Lodge did not try, as Ambassador Maxwell Taylor had 
done, to devise an .integrated and unified strategy that balanced every 
part of our effort . 
Instead, he declared, in his first month back in Viet-
n8I!l (September, 1965), that lithe U. S. nilitary was doing so well now that 
we face a distinc~possibility that VC main force units will be neutralized, 
and VC fortresses destroyed soon," and that therefore we should be r eady to 
give pacification a new push. 
Hhile his involvement was irregular and 
inconsistent , Lodge did nonetheless playa key role in giving pacification 
a boost . 
His rhetoric , even if vague, encouraged other advocates of paci -
fication to speak up. 
The man he brought with him, Edward Lansdale , gave 
by bis very presence an implicit boost to pacification . 
c. The III Marine Amphibious Force 
Meanwhile , to their own amazement, the J·farines were discovering that 
the toughest war for them was the war in the villages behind them near 
the Da Nang air case , r ather than the war against the main force , which 
had r etreated to the hill s to build up . In the first 12 months of their 
deployment , the l·!arines virtually r ever sed their emphasis, turning away 
* No other American Ambassador has ever had responsibility and authority 
even close to that in Saigon ; only military commands have exceeded it 
in size . 
iii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Exccmi vc Ordcr 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Datc: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
from the enemy to a grueling and painfully slow effort to pacify the 
villages of the central coast in their three TAORs . It was a job that 
Americans were not equipped for , and the f.!e.rine effort raised some basic 
questions about the role of U. S. troops in Vietnam, but nonetheless , the 
Marines began to try to sell the rest of the U, S. Government on the 
success and correctness of their still unproved strategy. 
The result 
was a major commitment to the pacification strategy by a service of the 
U. S. Armed Forces, and influence on the other services , particularly the 
ArmY. 
D. 
Washington Grtmlbles About The Effort 
When Lodge was Ambassador , there was widespread concern about the 
manageI:l.ent of the !-lission. 
Lodge was admittedly not a manager . 
This 
concern led to a major conference at Warrenton in January of 1966, dm--
ing which increased emphasis on pacification and better organization 
within the U, S, Mission were the main topics. 
Improving the Washington 
organizational structure was raised, but not addressed candidly in the 
final report; Washington seemed far readier to tell Saigon how to reorganize 
than to set their own house in order. 
But Warrenton symbolizes the growing 
dissatisfaction in Hashington with the Mission as it was . 
E. Presidential Emphasis on the "Other War" and Press Reaction 
Finally, there was the need of the President, for compelling domestic 
political reasons , to give greater emphasis to "the other war . " With the 
first full years of major troop commitment ending with victory not yet in 
sight, there was a growing need to point out to the American public and to 
the world that the United States was doing a great deal in the midst of 
war to build a new Vietnam. While this emphaSis did not necessarily have 
to also become an emphasis on pacification, it did, and thus the President 
in effect gave pacification his personal support -- an act which was 
acutely felt by Americans in Vietnem. 
F. 
Meanwhile, Back at the Har •.. 
A summary of the NACV Monthly Evaluations and other reports is con~ 
tained here, shO\dng how the U. S. command saw its own progress . 
The 
summary suggests that MACV fores aw heavy fighting all through 1966, and 
did not apparently agree with Ambassador Lodge's predictions and hopes 
that a major pacification effort could be started, but the issue was not 
analyzed before decisions were made. 
II. Honolulu 
A. 
The Conference - February 1966 
The details of the ,",'Orking sessions at the Honolulu conference do 
not appear , in retrospect, to be nearly as important on the future 
iv 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Occlassificd per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;J\c: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
emphasis on pacification as the public statements that came out of 
Honolulu, particularly tbe Declaration itself . 
Tbe discussions and 
the Declaration are sucmarized, including tbe President's final re-
marks in plenary session . 
B. 
Public Impact •.• 
The press reaction to the conference is summarized. 
III . 
Honolulu to Manila 
A. 
Saigon: 
Porter in Charge 
The first reorganization now took place, and Deputy ftmbassador Porter 
was put in direct charge of the civilian agencies . 
His responsibility and 
his ability to carry out his responsibility were not equal from the outset, 
end Porter saw his role in different terms than those in \1ashington who 
had given him his difficult task. 
A major problem ",as the lack of full 
support that Porter received from Ambassador Lodge, who had never been 
fUlly in favor of the reorganization . 
Another problem was the lack of a 
parallel structure in \~ashington , so that Porter found himself caught 
between the ·\-1ashington agencies and their representatives in Saigon, with 
Komer (see below) as a frequent participant. Nonetheless , Porter accom-
plished a great deal in the oonths this arrangement lasted; it just wasn't 
as much as Washington sought . 
B. 
WaShington: 
Komer As The Blowtorch 
In Washington, the President selected a McGeorge Bundy deputy, 
R. W. Komer, to be his Special Assistant on non-military activities in 
Vietnam. 
Komer did not have the same kind of authority over the He.shing-
t on agencies that Porter , in theory, had over the Saigon extensions. 
Komer pushed pacification hard, and became the first senior official, 
with apparently ready access to the President, who put forward the pro-
pacification position consistently in high level meetings , 
His mandate 
was contained in a loosely worded NSAN, 343, dated t-1arch 28 , 1966. During 
the summer of 1966, Komer applied great pressure to both the r11ssion and 
t he Washington agencies (thus earning from Ambassador Lodge the nickname 
of "Blowtorch"), with a series of cables and vi sits to Vietnam, of'ten 
using the President ' s name . 
C. 
Study Groups and Strategists : 
Summer 1966 
With Porter and Komer in their new roles, a series of Task Forces 
an~ Study Groups began to produce papers that gave a better rationale 
and strategy to pacification •. These included the Army study call ed PROVN, 
t he Priorities Task Force in Saigon, and the Roles and Nissions Study 
Groups in Saigon . 
At the same time, Westmoreland, ~hose year end wrap-
up message on Jar.uary 1, 1966, had not even mentioned pacification, sent 
v 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
i n a new long range strategy which emphasized pacification , to Lodge ' s 
pleasure. 
l-lACV also produced a new position on revamping ARVN , and 
briefed the lUssion Council on it in August , 1966. 
The Honolulu em-
phasis was beginning to produce tangible results on the U. S. side . 
D. 
The Single Hanager 
Despite the movement described in the above three sections , Wash-
ington wanted more, and was not satisfied with the rate of progress . 
Komer, therefore , in August of 1966 had produced a long paper which 
offered three possible changes in the management structure of the 
Mission . 
They were: (1) put all pacification responsibility and assets, 
i ncluding J-iACV Advisors, under Porter; (2) reorganize the civilian struc-
t ure to create a single office of operations , and strengthen MACV in-
ternally, but leave the civilians and the military split ; (3) give 
Westmoreland full pacification responsibility. 
The Mission rejected all 
these ideas , offering in their stead the proposal that Washington leave 
Saigon alone for a while, but the pressure for results and better manage-
ment was too great , and the inadequacies of the Mission too obvious , to 
leave it alone . 
Secretary McNamara weighed in at this point with a draft 
PreSidential memorandum proposing that vlestmol'eland be given responsibiiity 
for pacification . 
Koner and JCS concurred in it , but State , USIA, AID , 
and CIA nonconcurred. 
McNamara, Katzenbach, and Komer then went to Saigon 
t o take a look at the situation. 
When they returned, Katzenbach, new to 
t he State Department and previously uninvolved in the problem, recommended 
that Porter be told to reorganize the civilians along the lines previously 
discussed (similar to Komer ' s Alternative Number 2) . 
The President agreed, 
discussing i t with Lodge and Hestmoreland at Honolulu . 
But he added a 
vital warning: he would give the civilians only about 90 to 120 days to 
make the new structure work, and then would reconsider the proposal to 
t r ansfer responsibility for pacification to t-1A.CV . 
E. 
The J.lanila Conference 
The decision had not yet been transmitted to Sai gon, but it had been 
made . 
At Nanila, with six other heads of state in attendance , the dis-
cussion turned to other matters . 
At Manila, in the final Declaration , 
the GVN announced that they would commit half the armed forces to secur-
ing operati ons in support of pacification/RD . This had previously been 
discussed, but it was the public commitment that really mattered, and now 
it was on t he r ecord . 
IV . oeo t o eORD~ 
A. 
OCO on Trial: 
Introduction 
The Office of Civil Operations was formed , cr eating confusion and 
r esentment among the agencies, but also marking an immediate and major 
vi 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
step forward . 
The example of the civilians moving at this pace also 
created pressure and conflict within MACV, which was for the first time 
confronted with a strong civilian structure. 
The GVN indicated that it 
understood and approved of the new structure. 
B. 
OCO on Trial: 
Too Little Too Late 
Or Not Enough Time? 
Although it was slower than Washington desired, OCO did get off to 
a start in December of 1966. 
Wade Lathram, who had been USAID Deputy 
Director, was chosen to head up OCO -- a choice that was unfortunate, 
because LathraI:l, a skilled and cautious bUl'eaucrat, was not the kind of 
driving and d:ynamic leader that oeo - - in a brink of disaster situation 
from its inception -- needed. 
Even worse, Porter was almost immediately diverted from OCO to pay 
more attention to other matters . 
While the planners had hoped that 
Porter would take OCO in hand and give Latbram direct guidance , instead 
he l eft Lathram in control of OCO and was forced to turn his attentions 
to running the Mission, during a long vacation (one month) by Lodge . 
The most dramatic action that was taken was the selection of the 
Regional Directors , a move which even attracted newspaper attention. 
They included Henry Koren, formerly Porter ' s deputy ; John Paul Vann, 
the controversial former MACV advisor ; and Vince Heymann of the CIA. 
Slowly, the OCO then turned to picking its province r epresentatives . 
All in all, OCO accomplished many things that had never been done before; 
given time it could no doubt have done much more . 
But it was plagued 
from the outset by lack of support from the agencies and their represen-
tatives in Saigon, and vlashington made higher demands than could be met 
in Saigon. 
C. 
Time Runs Out 
It is not clear ,.,hen the President made the decision to scrap oeo. 
He communicated his decision to his field commanders at Guam, but there 
was a two-month delay before the decision was announced publicly or dis -
cussed with the GVN . 
D. 
The CORDS Reorganization 
As Bunker took over the Mission, there was a considerable turnover 
in key persormel. 
Bunker asked Lansdale and Zorthian to stay on, but 
Porter, Habib, Wtbrle , all left just as Locke, Komer, Calhoun, Cooper " 
and General Abrams all arrived. 
In the new atmosphere , Komer took the lead, making a series of recom-
mendations which maintained the civilian position within ~lACV , and 
Westmoreland accepted them. 
vii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
, 
Declassified per ExeculI\<e Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
An example of Komer's influence was the question of the role of the 
ARVN divisions in the RD chain of command, and here lfestmoreland took 
Komer I s suggestion even though it meant a reversal of the previous MACV 
position. 
E. 
The Mission Assessment as CORDS Begins 
The situation inherited by CORDS ",.as not very promising. 
J.feasure-
ments of progress had been irrelevant and misleading, and progress by 
nearly all standards has been slow or nonexistent . 
At this point, the 
study of CORDS and pacification becomes current events . 
viii 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
o 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
.... 
~ 
o 
." 
8 
z .... 
!2! 
.... '" 
• 
rv. C. ll. 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. 
RE-ElffilASIS ON PACIFICATION: 
1965- l967 
TABLE OF CONTENTS AJIID OUTLIllE 
I. 
THREADS THAT MET AT HONOLULU... • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
l 
A. 
Hop Tac... ... .... . .............. . .. . . ....... ..... .. . 
1 
B. 
Ambassador lodge and the "True Believers"..... . . . ... 
8 
C. 
III I>1arine Amphibious Force •. .•....• ;.. ............. 
16 
D. 
Washington Grumbles About the Effort................ 
20 
E. 
Presidential Emphasis on "The Ot her Har" and 
Press Reaction... ...... . .. . ... . . ...... . ............. 
28 
F . 
Meanwhile, Back at the War......... . ... ... .. ... . . . .. 
32 
II. 
HONOLUID. .. .. . ..... . . .. .. ....... .. ..... . .. .. .... .. .. ... . 
36 
A. 
The Conference - February 1966.... .. . ............... 
36 
B. 
Impact on Public in US, on US Mission in Vietnam, 
and on Vietnamese... . . • . . . . • . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . • • . . 
45 
III. 
HONOWLU TO MANILA . .•.•.•. . •.••.•. .. .•. .. • . .•. .•. .• . . . •• 
53 
A. 
Saigon : 
Porter in Charge ..... .... ........•..... • ~.. 
53 
B. 
Washington: 
Komer as the Blowtorch. ................ 
62 
C. 
Study Groups and Strategists : 
Summer 1966. .. .. .... . 
74 
D. 
The Single Nanager.... . ...... .. .... .. ... . . ...... .... 
91 
E. 
The 14anila Conference..... . .... . ...... .............. 
11.6 
IV. oeo TO CORDS......... . .... . ........... . ................. 
ll9 
A. 
OCO on Trial : 
Introduction.. ........ .... . . ......• ..• 
1.19 
B. oeo on Trial: 
Too Little Too Late -- Or Not 
Enough Time? .... . ........ . . ....... . .......... . ..... 
l22 
C. 
Time Runs Out..... ........... ... .... ... ........ .... . 
127 
D. 
The CORDS Reorganization.. ........................... 
132 
E. 
The ~lission Assessment as CORDS Begins . .. ...... .. . .. 
135 
ix 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
.... . 
• 
Declassified per EXCI.'utlve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'r - Sensitive 
r. Threads that l>tet at Honolulu 
A. 
Hop Tac 
While pacification received a low enphasis during troubled 1964-1965, 
there was one important exception: the Hop Tac program, designed to put 
" .. :hatever resources are required" into the area surrounding Saigon to 
pac'ity it. 
The area was chosen by Ambassador Lodge in his last ... reeks as 
Ambassador in June , 1964, a'1d Hop Tac deserves study because both its 
failures and limited achievements had many of the characteristics of our 
later pacification efforts -- and because, like all pacification efforts , 
there 'Vias constant disagreement within the Mission, the press , and the 
Vietnamese as to how well the program was doing . 
Hop Tac -- an intensive pacification ef'fort in the provinces ringing 
Saigon - - was fornally proposed at a high level strategy session in 
Honolulu in July of 1964 by Lodge , then on his ""ay home f'rom his first 
assignment as Ambassador. 
In a paper presented to Secretaries Rusk and 
l4cNamara and incoming Ambassador Taylor at Honolulu (dated June 19, 1964), 
Lodge wrote : 
"A combined GVH-US effort to intensify pacification efforts 
in critical provinces should be mede ... The eight critical pro-
vinces are: Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, Hau rlghie , Long An, Dinh Tuong, 
Go Cong, Vinh Long , and Quang Ngai. 
Top priority and maximum 
effort should be concentrated initially in the strategically 
important provinces nearest to Saigon, Le., Long an , Hau rIghia, 
and Binh Duong. 
Once real progress has been made in these p~o ­
vinces, the same effort should be made in the five others . "!! 
General Taylor and General \'lestmoreland began Hop Te.c, setting up 
a new and additional headquarters in Saigon which was supposed to tic 
together the overlapping and quarrelsome cocmands in the Saigon area. 
The Vietnamese set up a parallel, "counterpart" organj,zation, although 
critics of Hop Tac were to point out that the Vietnamese Hop Tac head-
quarters had virtually no authority or influence , and seemed primarily 
des;gned to satisfy the PJ:lericans . 
(Ironically, Hop Tec is the Viet-
namese word for "coopez'ation," which turned out to be just , ... hat Hop Tee 
lacked . ) 
Hop Tec had a feature previously missing from pacification plans : 
it sought to tie together the pacification plans of a seven-province 
area (expa.l1ded f:'om Lodge I s three pro7inces to include the adjacent pr:)-
vinces of Phuoc Tuy, Bien Hoa , Phuoc Thanh, end Gia Dinh, which surround 
Saigon like a doughnut) , into a plan in which each province subordinated 
its own priorities to the concept of building a "gient oil spot" around 
Saigon. 
In a phrase 'I,hich eventually became a joke in the l·lission, the 
Aoerican beading the Hop Tac Secretariat at its inception, Colonel 
1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecUllve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Jasper Wilson, briefed senior officials on the creation of "rings of 
steel" which w'ould grow out,,;ard from Saigon until the area from the 
crunbodian border to the South China Sea \taS secure . 
Then, accord1ng 
t o the plan, Hop Tac 'tiould move into the Delta and North. 
Colonel 
Wilson ordered his staff to produce a phased plan in which the area (Map 1) ' 
t o be pacified was divided into four circles around Saigpn. 
Each r i ng 
was to be pacified in four months , according to the original plan, which 
never had any chance of success . 
But Wilson, under great pressure from 
his superiors, ordered the plan produced, got his Vietnamese counterparts 
to translate it, and issued it . 
The kickoff date for Hop Tec was to be 
September 12, 1964 : the operation , a sweep into the VC-controlled pine-
apple groves just \,est and soutbHest of the city of Saigon -- the YC 
base nearest to the city, which had not been entered by the GYrI since 
the last outpost had been abandoned in 1960. 
The operation began on schedule, with elements of the 51st Regiment 
moving toward their objective west of Saigon. 
During the second day of 
the operation, the u.~it ra~ into a minefield and took numerous casualties . 
Shortly thereafter, instead of continuing the operation, the unit broke 
off contact ~~d , to the amaz~~ent of its advisors , turned back towards 
the city of Saigon. 
When ne .... -t located it "ras in the r:tiddle of Saigon 
participating in the abortive ~ 
d ' etat of September 13, 
196!~ . 
From. that point on, Hop Tac was a constant source of disuute within 
t he U. S. Missio)) . 
Almost to a man, the civilian agencies II support1ngn 
Han Tec felt that the program was unnecessary, repetitive, and doomed. 
Th;Y cl aimed that they preferred to work through existi ng channels, al-
t hOugh these, in MACY's view, were inadequate . 
This view was not stated 
openly, however , since the Ambassador end General Hestmoreland had com-
mitted all U.S. agencies to full support . 
On October 6, ·1964, for 
example , Genere.l Taylor sent Washington an EXDIS cable in which he "dis-
cussed a~d rejected a suggestion to decentralize the pacification effort , 
and instead listed severe.l actions that the Nission "ould take . First 
among these was a "unanimous r ecoI:ll!lendation
U that the MiSSion "give full 
support to Hop Tac Plan , assuring it the necessary pr iority to give it 
every chance t o succeed •.• When Hop Tac priorities permit , concentrate on 
sel ected weak areas . II y 
Thus there 'tras a r el uctance to cr itici ze t he 
program directly . 
Deadlines sl ipped continual.lYj phase lines "rere r eadjusted; t he 
official count of npacified" hamlets climbed steadily . 
But a special 
study of the area made in October, 1964, by r epresentatives of USOM, 
USIS , and NACV concluded: nGenerally speaking, Hop Tac , as a program, 
does not appear to exist as a unified and meaningful operation." "j/ 
The official view of Hop Tee was that the new coordinating machinery 
was doing some good . 
Thus, during a period in which cables on t he general 
situation were rather gloomy, Ambassador Taylor could tell the President 
2 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r 
\ H'~ 
D 
C 
N G H I A 
B 
\/ 
LO\G 
( 
Declassified per E."l:ecu\1vc Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
SECRET 
SOUTH VIETNAM 
PRIORITY ZONES 
HOP lAC I 
PIi UOC TIIANII 
D 
_G J A 
DIN fI 
B l E N 
11 0 A 
C 
PHUOC TUY 
D 
/ 
rJ Zone·A' 
n 
Zone '(' 
C 
.Zone'S· 
n 
ZonE' '0' 
'W,P 1 
SECRET 
2.~ 
---
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
in his weekly NODIS that while npacification progress throughout the 
rest of Vietnam was minimal at best , largely because of the political 
climate ... Some forward movement occurred in the Hop Tac effort grouing 
out of U. S. Mission discussions with the Prime Hinister on September 25 . 
Tbe number of operating cbeckpoints in the Hop Tac area increased 
mArkedly; command areas were strengthened; available troop strength 
inc,reased. " !il 
Ninor statistical advances , taken out of context , were 
continually being used in the above manner to prove overall progress. 
Tbe l.tACV Command History for 1964 reflects the official view: 
nAt 
the end of 1%4., Hop Tac "'as one of the few pacification areas that 
sbowed some success and greater promise . " 51 
But subsequent events in 
the area do not bear out this vie'lT. 
In February of 1966 for example --
18 months after the birtb of Hop Tac -- "rhen the Hop Tac area was desig-
nated as one of the four "National Priority Areas , " the briefers "Tere 
unable to show Ambassadors Lodge and Porter any progress in the preced-
ing year . 
They could not even produce a plan for the coming year . 
Originally Hop Tac ,'las focused on cleaning out the nearest '1C base 
areas, but by February of 1966 - - with the GVN unable to stop the growllig 
VC build-up, the emphasis i"as "placed on lines of communications, with 
special attention to be given vital i nstallations including Bien Hoa and 
Tan Son Nhut air bases and ammunition and gasoline depots . " §j The best 
the briefers could do , in the final briefing prior to the Honolulu 
Confer ence,was to say that they hoped to pacify 72 h~ets in the entire 
seven-province area, and "consoli date" 144 hamlets in Gia Dinh - - which 
meant tbe hamlets ringing Saigon, including many "'hicb were really part 
of the city. 
Lodge and Porter ;'Tere told that day If there has been a 
lessening of security in Hau Nghia and Gia Dinh provinces . 
RF and PF 
units generally are not up to autborized strengths . 
The new cadre pro-
gram should be helpful in solving the problem of continued hamlet security 
after p acification . • . The 1966 plan is not overly optimistic from a military 
standpoint . l1 ]} 
(The memorandum recording of this meeting, made by a 
member of General Lansdale ' s staff, shows as the only Ambassadorial gui-
dance after this sobering report : 
l1Naps dra','ffi to depict progress of 
Rural Construction (Pacification) should show as the goal only that area 
to be pacified during the year • .• The U. S. Hission menpo ... oer committee 
should look into the use of refugees in the national labor force . " ) §/ 
The Vietnamese were cynical about Hop Tac ; it was something, specu-
lation ran , that General Khanh had to do to keep the ' Americans happy, but 
it was clearly an American sho,,, , clearly run by the United States , and 
the Vietnamese ',rere reluctant to give it meaningful support . 
It was one 
of the fir~t mej ( r programs ",ith ""hich the Uni",ed States became publicly 
identified (since Diem had always kept the United States in as much of 
a background role as possible -- and its shortcomings were in part deri ved 
f rom this fact . 
3 
TOP SECRET 
Sensitive 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
All through Ambassador Taylor ' s tenure, Hop Tac was something on 
which he and the t1ission Council pinned hope . 
General ylestmoreland 
thought the program had been reasonably successful, "'hen he- told .the 
Mission Council about Hop Tac's first year: 
"General Hestn:orela.."ld said that while Hop Tac could be 
said only to have been about 50% successful, it had undoUbtedly 
averted a VC seige of Saigon . " W 
This same view was reflected in r,tcGeorge Bundy ' s comments in a memoran-
dum to the President months earlier in February, 1965, when he said : 
"The Hop Tac program of pacification in this area has not 
been an unqualified success, but it has not been a failure, and 
it has certainly prevented any strangling seige of Saigon . 
We 
did not have a chance to form an independent judgment on Hop Tac, 
but we did conclude that whatever its precise measure of success , 
it is of great importance that this operation be pursued ~~th full 
vigor . 
This is the current policy of the IUssion ." 10/ 
There were others who said that, as a matter of fact , Saigon ~fas almost 
under seige end that the situation was deteriorating. 
Hestmoreland' s o\m 
headquarters, for example , sent to Wasbington in the June Nonthly Evalua-
tion from MACV , the following statement which seems to contradict West-
moreland's optimism: 
"The sealing off of Saigon f'rom surrounding areas , no 
matter how incomplete the sealing may be , has had and will 
continue to have serious economic as well as military ef'f'ects . " 1lJ 
Shortly after he arrived in Vietnam for his second tour, Lodge asked for 
a private assessment of Hop Tac from an Embassy officer , who reported to 
him in early September of 1965: 
"1. 
Hop Tac did not achieve its original goals primarily 
because they were completely unrealistic and did not 
take into account the dif'ficulty of the task . 
These 
goals were set quite arbitrarily and with no regard 
for the available resources and the strength of the 
enemy • 
"2 . 
The second reason f'or the failures of Hop Tnc l i es in 
i ts strategic concept . 
The idea of' concentric cir cles 
o~tward from Saigon to be pacified in successive waves 
of clearing, securing and developing may be sound in 
macroscopic te~s ; when the Hop Tac area is looked at 
carefUlly, the viability of this strategy breaks down . 
The concentric phase lines around Saigon do not ade-
quately ta~e into account existing ar.eas of GVN 
strength and existing Viet Cong base areas ; r ather 
4 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
they cozmnit the GVN to a continual expansionary effort 
on all sides of Saigon simultaneously, an effort which 
is beyond its capabilities . 
Above all, they ignore the 
political structure of the area around Saigon. 
"3. 
The U.S. Hission has two broad courses of action avail-
able L'1 regard to Hop Tac . 
First , the Mission Council 
may feel t hat the ar ea encompassed by Hop Tac remains 
the first pacification priority of the U. S. and the GVN. 
If this is the considered judgment of the 1'-1ission Cmmcil, 
then we must seek ways of re - emphasi zing, re-invigorating 
and r eorienting Hop Tac in order to achieve a dramatic 
and sustained success in pacification . 
"4 . 
There is an alternative open to the 1·1iss10n Council. 
Perhaps it would be politically unwise to attempt to 
commit the GVN to re- emphasis of Hop Tac at this time . 
There are several f acts which support this view: 
UA. 
The GVN has never considered Hop Tac its mom plen 
and its elm number one priority. 
The staff planning 
for the plan was done almost entirely by the United 
States, and then translated into Vietnamese . It is , 
in the eyes of many Vietnamese, fthe plan of the 
Americans. ' 
liB . It is perhaps the most difficult area in the country 
in which to attempt pacification . 
Since it surrounds 
Saigon (but does not include it) , every political 
t remor in the capital is felt in the neighboring 
area • •• the High Command has created chains of cottIDand 
in the area which are clearly designed primarily to 
prevent coups, and only secondarily to pacify the 
countryside . 
Another example : in the last 11 months , 
24 out of 31 district chiefs and five out of seven 
province chiefs have been changed . 
lie. Prime l.tinister Ky ... Till never feel that Hop Tac i s his 
plan. If he is seeking a major public triumph, and 
intends to devote his attention to achieving that 
t r iumph, it is unlikely that he v~ll choose Hop Tec , 
whi ch as mentioned above , is publicly considered an 
American plan . 
Horeover , to the extent that any Viet-
namese is publicly connecte~ with Hop Tac , it is 
Nguyen Khanh. 
For this reason, more than any other , 
the dangers of re- emphasizing Hop Tac outvieigh the 
possible gains ..• II 
5 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per E."l:ecu\1vc Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
liThe situation in the Hop Tac area will not collapse if 
Hop Tac is not revitalized now. 
With the available forces, and 
particularly with the impending arrival of the 1st Infantry' 
Division to take up a position across the southern arc of Zone D, 
Saigon itself is not going to be threatened any more than it 
presently is . 
The threat -- which is substantial -- comes from 
the enemy within, and the solution does not lie within the re-
sponsibility of the Hop Tac Council: it is a problem for the 
Saigon police and intelligence communities . This threat , serious 
as it is , is not directly affected by the presence of the Viet 
Cong' s 506th battalion 20 miles away in Hau Nghia, nor by Zone D. 
The two problems can be dealt with separat ely) and solution of 
the ir,ternal security problems of Saigon are not contingent on 
the success of clearing Hau Nghia and Long An . 11 ~ 
In an effort to reconcile these opposing views about Hop Tac, Lodge 
told the September 15 gission Council that "the original reasons for the 
emphasis placed on the area surrounding Saigon ... were still valid, pri-
marily because of the heavy depsity of population . 
Lodge noted , however, 
lack of a clear commitment to Hop Tac on the part of the GVN, possi~ly 
due to the fact that the Vietnamese consider the program an American 
scheme . 
The view was also expressed that the trouble may also lie in 
US/GVN differences over some fundamental concepts in Hop Tac. Finally, 
Ambassador Lodge said it was essential that all interested American 
agencies be agreed on concepts and tactics before an approach to the GVN 
could be made ."}]/ 
After this meeting, no significant action was taken, 
and the matter lapsed. 
The importance of Hop Tac is still difficult to assess; it i s in-
cluded here primarily because of its role as the one major pacification 
program that was tried during the 1964-1965 period wben pacification 
was not receiving its present top-level empbasis . \fbether or not it 
averted a seige of Saigon, as General Hestmoreland claimed, is a seman-
tic question: what constitutes a seige in a guerrilla war? 
Sai gon, of 
course , never was under seige in t he classic sense of the word, but it 
is hard to conceive of it ever being literally cut off as Dien Bien Phu 
or Nakefing were - - this would not be a logical objective to the Viet 
Cong, who wanted to put pressure on the capital but knew they couldn ' t 
seal it off (nor would have wanted to , since they got supplies from it) . 
Wbat is important is that the failures of Hop Tac were never ade-
quately reported and analyzed prior to embarking on other pacification 
efforts . Thus , ~t one point General Wes+Anorel~d told each of his Senior 
Corps Advisors to start a Hop Tac in his area -- a str ange request since 
Hop Tac was designed to pull together a multiplicity of commands not 
duplicated in any other area. 
Each Corps naturally responded by pro-
ducing plans which concentrated their pacification assets around the 
Corps headquarters - - De Nang, and Can Tho or, in tqe case of II Corps , 
6 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I}cclassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NNI) Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Qui Nhon . This in turn led naturally to the later r:ational Priority Area 
program, but had no other value . 
With f".1ACV reluctant to close do .... m its Hop Tac Secretariat, with the 
civilian Aroericaps giving Hop Tec only verbal support , and with the 
Vietnamese l eaving e pO'.-ierless staff at the headquarters, Hop Tec could 
well have survived as an appendix to the normal chain of co.mc.and, as so 
many outdated structures survive in Vietnam because no one wants to admit 
their irreleve..''lce . 
But General Kestr.1oreland Sal., a way to dispose of Hop 
Tee cleanly end quietly in the summer of 1966, and he took it . 
At the 
HissioD Council meeting of July 7, 1966 : 
rlGeneral Westnorcland then turned to the subject of Hop 
Tac. 
He summarized the purpose of the Hop Tac concept, which 
was iI:lplemented two years ago, and said that - - while it has 
enjoyed only modest succesS over the past two years - - the 
situation in the area surrounding Saigon/Cholon ..... 'ould be com-
paratively worse if lie had not had the Hop Tec arrangement . 
He noted th~t recent organizational changes have taken place, 
which have resulted in the Capital Military Region becoming 
the Capital Nilitary District (as part of tbe III Corps Tac-
tical Zone) with Saigon r~.aining as an autonomous city. 
In 
view of these changes, there is some question of the validity 
of continuing with the original concept , 
More importantly, 
III Corps has a Revolutionary Developnent Council and a Hop 
Tee Council which results in some duplication of effort . 
Consequently, the General believes that these two councils 
should be merged, '..dth the Revolutionary Development Council 
absorbing the Hop Tac Council. 
General Westmoreland asked 
the Mission Council to endorse this proposal for him to carry 
out . 
After brief discussion, Ambassador Lodge indicated his 
approval." 14/ 
By this time Hop Tac had. long lost the "highest priority" which was 
supposed to justify it, and both the American and the Vietnamese bad 
turned to other matters . 
But Hop Tac was not adequately analyzed before embarking on other 
efforts, and its shortcomings were largely forgotten by the time that 
the still-deteriorating situation in Gia Dinh led l·'lACV to con:mit three 
U. S. Army battalions to the inner area surrounding Saigon - - the original 
first phase of Hop Tac -- as part of Operation Fairfax in November of 
1966 . 
The 1-1ission, with no institutional memory, forgot - - or never 
learned -- the lessons that Hop Tac could have offered. 
7 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B. 
Ambassador Lodge and the "True Believers" 
l>1any senior American officials have paid varying degrees of lip 
service to the pacification effort since 1962 -- a fact .. rhich makes it 
extremely hard t) determine who really pushed pacification and who 
didn ' t . 
But about P~bassador Lodge , there can be little question . 
He 
had repeatedly called pacification "the heart of the matter ," and his 
unfailing belief in the importance of the effort can be clearly shOliID 
in his public and private statements and his cables . 
His emphasis on pacification resumed the day he returned to Saigon 
in August 1905, when in his arrival statement he said that the United 
States supported the IItrue revolutionll of the VietnaJIlese people . 
His 
continual emphasis on the effort seems to have had a definite impact on 
the mood in \'lashington and in the Nission , and played a role i n the events 
leading up to the Honolulu Conference in February 1966 -- where pacifica-
tion was given (or so it seemed to Americans and Vietnamese alike in 
Vietnam) the President 's blessing. 
It is true that Ambassador Taylor also felt that pacification \\'as 
important and that it would deserve high emphasis ; his push on Hop Tac 
clearly demonstrates this fact . 
But because l-1ax\.ell Taylor saw that it 
was his responsibility as Ambassador to reconcile competing requirements 
for limited resources, and develop a single overall strategy for the 
effort, he never let pacification consume too many resources prematurely. 
Lodge, on the other hand, did not see himself as an administrator or 
manager of the U. S. 1-1ission, but as the President I s personal representa-
tive and advisor i n Saigon . 
Thus, he felt no qualms about advocating a 
certain course of action -- in this case, pacification . 
There is no 
r ecord of Ambassador Lodge worrying about the way his latest proposals 
would affect the balance of the whole effort . 
He simply did not see him-
self as responsible for the actions of the operating agencies which 
represented AID, USIA, and the CIA, let alone DOD , in Vietnam ~ -- not 
even after receiving a strong letter of authority from PreSident Johnson 
i n July of 1965: J:2} 
"As you take charge of the American effort in South 
Vietnam, I want you to have this expression of my confidence , 
and a reaffirmation of my desire that as ADbassador you exer-
cise fUll responsibility for the work of the United States 
* See for example, Lodge ' s NODIS to the President , February 1, 1966, in 
which he said: , 11 •• • r have learned of Zarth1an ' s wire to Marks , which, 
of course, he has the right to send, since I hold that Zorthian, like 
U. S. agency chiefs here, has and should have an open channel to his 
agency. It is a statement of Zorthian ' s opinion which, of course, was 
sent without my approval or direction .. , II ~ 
(The subj-ect was apparently 
a suggestion that Lodge address the United Nations General Assembly in 
New York, although Lodge ' s cable cited does not explicitly state what 
Zorthian ' s cable said . ) 
8 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExeculI\<e Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Government in South Vietnam . 
is parallel to that set forth 
of July 2, 196h. n * W 
In general terms this authority 
in my letter to Ambassador Taylor 
Given his belief in the fundamental importance of the pacifi"cation 
effort, Lodge was ready to push it at any time he could. 
He did not 
examine the possibility that certain times were more favorable than 
others for an effort which needed the £ull participation of the Viet-
namese in order to succeed, end, li~e many in the government, failed 
to see that at certain times emphasis on pacification would not only 
not Hork but would be harmful to GVN/US relations, and would reduce 
the chances for a successfUl joint effort at some more propitious time . 
Thus, it is not surprising that one of his last major documents at 
the end of his first tour as Ambassador proposed HOp Tac (see I . A.) - -
in the face of strong possibilities that the situation was not f avorabl e 
t o it -- and that on his return in August 1965 he was advocating more 
effort in pacification . 
Thus, for example, meeting with his senior officers one month after 
he arrived, Lodge "began the lrl;eeting by stating that in his opinion the 
United States military was doing so well not that ' we face a distinct 
possibility that VC main force units ~lill be neutralized and that VC 
fortresses will be destroyed soon . 
tofe should be ready to handle the VC 
in small units . This gives counter-subversion/terrorism or pacification 
or counterinsurgency -- I am not overly concerned with what we call it --
a new urgency for all of us here . I n J]2j 
It is likely that if Lodge had clarified his view of pacification 
and repeated it continually in public and privately, as he did with 
anything he believed in, his view \-lOud eventUally have ~aken hold in 
the United States Mission. 
But the problem of how pacification should 
work was -- and is -- a very difficult one . It raises a number of ex-
tremely difficult quest ions on which the United States Government has 
never r eached a unified position . 
Sensing that Lodge was receptive to ideas which emphasized pacifica-
tion but that he had no set views on details, many groups and individuals 
besieged him with a resurgence of ideas and philosophies on pacification. 
They were all encouraged by his verbal support or his glowing cables to 
Wllsh1ngton . 
The whole atmosphere in the Nission became more favorable 
towards pacification and pacifiers ; Lansdale, Colonel Serong (the 
Australi an who was to organize the Police Field Force with support from 
* The letter to Taylor had said, among other points : "I wish it clearly 
understood that this overall responsibility includes the whole mili-
tary effort in South Vietnam and authorizes the degree of command and 
control that you consider appropriate . II 
9 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I)ccJlIssilied per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Lodge ) , Sir Robert Thompson (whose t·lalayan experiences had led him to 
emphasize the police) , Colonel Bohannon (who began as a Lansdale deputy, 
but whose views took a different line), the Marines (with their pacifi-
cation efforts and CAP ' s near Da Nang), the CIA (which produced, ~th 
Lodge I s strong sl'pport , the PAT ' s-turned RD cadre) , USIA and AID (with 
their small but growing field programs), the Army (which entered the 
game l ate but elicited from Lodge on visits to the U. S. 25tb Infantry 
Division and then the 1st Infantry Divisi on , some of his l ongest and 
most glowing accounts of pacification in action . 12/) 
These groups and individuals fought about details , sometimes 
debating minor points like medieval monks but also disagreeing on 
r attler basic points -- such as whether the object \>,as to gain the 
population's support or to control them by force . 
(A popular Marine 
saying, which tried to bridge the gap, went: 
lIGet the people by the 
bal ls , and their hearts and ninds will follow ." ) 
But each group found 
something that appealed to Lodge, and each in turn gained encouragement 
from him. 
The slow change in mood also affected WaShington . 
In dealing with his role in the re - emphasis of pacification, we 
must distinguish behleen Lodge" s influence on our overall, or grand, 
strategy -- on ,·,bich he was ultir.iately to ha .... e considerable impact --
and his influence on the operational details of the policy. 
The l atter 
did not interest h~ on a continuing basis , and it is thus easy to under-
estimate his infl uence . 
There was , for example, a t endency in Saigon 
during his Ambassadorship to minimize his importance , since each agency 
could i gnore him when be told them to do something and usually get away 
with it . 
But this popular vie,·, overlooked Lodge ' s iJ:'Ipact in encourag-
ing all sorts of people to ~~erge from parts of the USC with renewed 
hope for pacification . It overlooked the impact of his cables and state-
ments , which added up to a massive endorsement of pacification. In his 
NODIS weeklies to the President , for example , pacification receives more 
attention than any other subject . 
Alone, Lodge could have done little , if anything, to move the USG 
around. 
But his influence seems clear , more so in retrospect than at 
the time; at a time when frustrations were growing, he was ecpbasizing 
a different r hetoric and strategy. 
The best way to show his ~phas is is simply to quote from the 
cables and memoranda of the period. 
Each one shows Lodge, either 
directly or indirectly, putting forth his general beliefs -- sometimes 
contradictory. 
They form an important part of the background to 
Honolulu, where paci fication tr.'as to get its biggest push to t hat date : 
1. 
Lodge at the end of his first tour in Vi etnam, defining 
pacification in his paper proposing Hop Tac : 
"The fir st priority after the military have cleared an 
area is to bring about the selection of an able man for that area, 
10 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
I)ccJlIssilied per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
who will in turn go about creating a basically civilian 
counter-terrorist organization on the 'precinct ' level, or 
equivalent thereof . .. Its prime purpose will be, notably with 
pol ice help, to create security for the local government and 
f ree it fro~ all intimidation by going through the precinct 
with a fine-toothed comb ... Once the local government feel s 
safer, it should move energetically to promote public safety 
for the people ; the people should then rally more to the 
government; and this should create an upward spiral as 
regards security organization ... USm.t and USIA will support 
these local 'precinct ' organizations, will actually work 
t hrough them, and will seek to make it attractive to be one 
of those who builds such a counter-ten'orism precinct organiza-
tion . . . The military should take special precautions in thei r 
operations not to injure in any way the non-combatants . 
I t 
must also behave itself so well that the people like the 
Army ... " 20/ 
2. 
Lodge ' s Ten Point Program for Success : 
"In each city precinct and each rural hamlet inunedi -
ately adjacent to a thoroughly pacified city (i . e . , the 
smallest unit from a public safety standpoint) the follOwing 
program should be underta..l<.en in the follm.fi.ng order : 
"1. 
Saturate the minds of the people with some socially 
conscious and attractive ideology, which is susceptible of 
being carried out . 
"2. 
Organize the people politicaJ.1y with a haml.et chief 
and committee whose actions would be backed by the police or 
t he military using police-type tactics . 
This committee should 
have r epresentatives of the pol itical, military, economic and 
soci al organizations and should have an executive who directs . 
"3. Wi t h the help of' the poli ce or military, conduct a 
census. 
"4. 
I ssue identification cards . 
"5. Issue permits for the movement of goads and people . 
"6. 
When necessary, hol d a curfew. 
"7. 
Than.l{s to all these methods, go through each hamlet 
with a fine ~ tooth comb to apprehend the t errorists . 
118. 
experts , 
At t he f irst quiet moment, bring in agricultural 
school teachers, etc . 
11 
TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;Jlc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"9. The hamlet should also be organized for its own 
defense against seall Viet Cong attacks . 
"10 . After all these things have been accomplished, hord 
elections for local office . " 21/ 
COMMENT : Lodge began his second tour as Ambassador where he had left 
off' the year before . 
The above paper, which he also transmitted to the 
. President in a HODIS message, again represented no official U. S. 
poSition . After writing it and giving it to everyone in the Mission, 
he let the matter drop, and thus the paper did not assume any official 
character. 
Since nothing was changed in the procedures of the Mission, 
and since the old criteria for pacification still applied unchanged, 
Lodge had, in typical fashion, failed to affect the operating Mission . 
3. 
The Assignment of Lansdale : 
"Handpicked group of about ten experienced cOW"lter-
subverSion/counter terlurism workers under direction of 
Edward G. Lansdale will b.e going to Saigon to provide 
Ambassador Lodge \Qth special operating staff in field of 
political action both at central level and also in connection 
with rural programs . II 22/ 
COMMENT : From the beginning, there ,"ias misunderstaYl.ding over Lansdale ' s 
role in Lodge's Embassy. 
The first cable reflects this . 
The phrase 
"counter-subversion/counter-terrorism workers, " seems to contradict the 
latter part of the sentence, about "political action. " From the start 
Lodge wented him to "get pacification going." Thus , less than a 
month later, Lodge told the President : 
"I appointed Edward Lansdale, with his complete approval, 
to be chairman of the U. S. Mission Liaison Group to the newly 
created Vietnamese governmental body having to do with what we 
call "pacification, ' what they call I rural construction,' and 
what means to me sociall conscious ractical uolitics the 
b - reduct of which is effective counter-subversio terrorism. 
I thought it was important for all concerned for him to have a 
definite allocation where he would have the best chance of 
bringing his talents to bear. 
I trust that the hopes of some 
journalists that he is here in an adversarial relationship 
with existing US agencies will be nipped in the bud by making 
him the spokesman for the whole US t-tission in this particular 
regard. 11 (u-Yl.derlining added) 23/ 
TPus J another action which served to strengthen the pacification priority, 
e.l though its primary reason ~robably \ras to get Lansdale working on 
sometM.ng other than Saigon politics . 
12 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecllIl ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO O<lte: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
4 . 
Lodge on the Use of U.S. Troops in Pacification: 
liThe presence of Americen troops does provide the oppor-
tunity for thorough pacification of the areas in which they are 
stationed ~~d full advantage should be taken of this oppor-
t unity. It is a very big dividend from our investment of men 
and money. 
For exa.mple, the Third l4arine.Division has scored 
impressive successes north, south, and west of Da Nang . . . If 
our American troops can emulate this perfonnance (of the proto-
CAC units) of 60 Americans and 150 Vietnamese, we ought to get 
a t·remendous amount of small unit nighttime effect! ve pacifica-
tion, end we would be neglecting an opportunity not to use 
American troops for this purpose, thereby pacif'ying the country 
and transfonning the ARVN, making it into a much more vital and 
e~fective element of Vietnamese society, able at some not too 
remote date to ce:rry on by themselves ,rithout outside help . .. 
We are already discussing with the Vietnamese the possibility 
of singling out areas that look like good prospects, that are 
potentially pretty much over on our side, and then pacifying 
them so as to get a little smell of across -the-board success in 
the air .. . I am not ready to say, 
1 ~'1hat areas ~-rould be chosen 
for pacification, when should the plan be started, what objectives 
would be best, I but hope to be able to do so soon . 
I am now 
encouraging General Ky to concentrate GVN e~forts and enthusiasm 
on pacification so that this can have sustained, wholehearted 
GVN participation . . . Development of popular electoral processes 
is part of all our current planning for counter subversion/ 
t errorism in ' rural construction (pacification) I . " 24/ 
COMt.iENT : 
Here, for the first time , Lodge addresses a key point : 
the 
role of U.S. troops on pacification. 
The whole concept of the use of 
U.S . . troops 'f/aS being worked out during this period (see follo'fring 
section on 14arines) , end Lodge now began to weigh in with qualified 
support for the twine approach, based on an overly optimistic view of 
the Situation. 
5. 
Lansdale's Heekly Report, October 4 , 1965: 
"Past week devoted to getting GVN into sound start again 
on pacification program ... U.S..., Mission Liaison Group shaping 
up into realistic instrument for working level teamwork on 
pacification by all U. S. Missions ... " 25/ 
COMlOOlT : 
Lansda.'le wes responding to the direction g1 ven him by Lodge . 
6. 
Lodge on the OVlJ ' s Attitude Tb~~rds Pacification : 
IIDtrring my talk with General Co, the deputy Prime Mini ster 
in charge of six ministries, I was impressed by the amount of 
13 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Occlassified per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
sustained analytical thought \-lhich he, with his colleagues, had 
given to how to organize the government for the great new job 
of pacification which confronts them -- and which is clearly 
their government t s most important slngle-responsibility. II ?!iJ 
C01.~lENT : 
Lodge had by this time let the GVN know clearly what tune he 
wanted to bear, and ,.-ith their usual skill the Vietnamese -- even 
General Co, who turned out to be worthless on pacification -- were 
playing the right song back. 
7 . 
"ylhen the chance to win over the people was missed some 
years ago , a situation came into being in ''tlhich it was in-
dispensable for the VC large units to be defeated before true 
community building, with its mixture of political and security 
measures, would be possible . 
Otherwise , the VC battalions, 
emerging rrom untouchable sanctuaries , would destroy whatever 
community building had. painstakingly been achieved . 
Now it 
looks as though the VC know this and has alreedy begun to act 
on the knowledge, transforming themselves into small units and 
individual terrorists, and into subversive political operators ." m 
COl-1t.rENT : 
Lodge ' s SE::quence of events - - destroy the main force enemy 
first , pacify second -- is hard to argue with, but his assessment of 
VC capabilities and intentions falls short of accuracy. 
As a final note to the examination of Lodge ' s emphasis on 
pacification, it is worth\~hile asking why he has so consistently put 
such a high priority on the effort -- r egardless of methodology -- to 
gain control of the villages . 
The answer may lie in his strong views 
on the way the war will end in Vietnam. 
Lodge doubted that there 
would ever be meaningful negotiations with the Viet Congo 
An old hand 
at negotiating with the communists , Lodge felt that the most likely 
end to the war was for the enemy to If fade away" after a prolonged 
period of conflict . 
In his view, therefore, control of the population 
became the best way to force the fadeaway . 
Furthermore , in the event 
that there was some sort of pro forma discussions with the communists 
at some future date, Lodge felt that there were certain minimum 
conditions of a IIsatisf'actory outcome II which must be met. 
An examina-
t ion of his definition of a satisfactory outcome shows the overriding 
importance of the pacification effort in his mind. 'The following i s 
from a telegram sent "For the President and the Secretary from Lodge" 
on October 21, 1965, which Lodge conside~ed one of his most important 
cables: 
"What we consider a satisfactory outcome to be \o:ould, 
of course, be a very closely kept secret . It would include 
the following, not necessarily in this order: 
14 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;Jlc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"1. 
The area around Saigon and south of Saigon (all 
of the Delta) must be pacified. 
This area includes about 
55 to 60% of the population of Vietnam. 
'Pacified' is 
defined as the existence of a state of mind a~ong the people 
that they have a stake in the goverrunent LS shown by the 
holding of local elections . It also means a proper local 
poli ce force. 
In brief, a pacified area is economically, 
socially, and politically a part of the RVl·r. 
"2 . 
The thickly populated northeastern strip along the 
coast which includes 25% of the population would be com-
pletely pacified. 
"3 . 
The GVN would retain its present control of' all 
cities and all provincial capitals . 
"4. All principal roads would be open to the Vietnamese 
military day and night . 
"5 . 
Those areas not pacified ,",ould not be safe havens 
for the VC but would be contested by energetic offensive 
forays to prevent consolidation of a communist base . 
"6. The VC disarmsj and their .... -eapons and explosives 
are removed from their hands . 
Their main force units broken up. 
"7 . 
North Vietnam stops its infiltration . 
"8 . 
Chieu Hoi rehabilitation would be extended to indiv-
i dual VC who are suitable ... 
"9 . 
Hardcore VC to go to North Vietn8J:l. 
"10. GVN to approve . 
"COMr-1ENT : This means that we would not be insisting on the 
complete elimination of the VC although no safe haven would be 
allocated them. It would mean that 1;re end the GVN would control. 
80 to 85% of the population and that the VC would be limited 
to the jungle end mountainous areas where they would go on as 
bandits, much as their counterparts in Naleya and Luzon -- and 
',!here the GVll would have the right to pursue them and try to 
destroy them. " 28/ 
Lodge ' s formula for a satisfactory outcome is based on the absolute 
necessity of controlling the villages . 
In day-to -day terms this meant 
t hat1 as Ambassador, Lodge had to push pacification as hard as possible . 
Thus, he was quite pleased with the emphasis that ceme out of the 
Honolulu conference in February of l.966. 
15 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExeculI\<e Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C. III Harine Amphibious Force 
To what extent the growing I·~rine emphasis on pacification was a factor 
during the peri od before the Honolulu conference is impossible to deter -
mine ; the timing and. evidence would suggest that the impact of the Marine 
stre.tegy was greatest in the period after Honolulu, as they bec8.I!le more 
sure of the rightness of their approach, and as they garnered. more and 
more publicity for it. Nonetheless , in the first eleven months of their 
mission in I Corps , the ~~ines had gotten deeply into the pacification 
program. 
The r·;arines thus became the most vocal advocates within the Armed 
FOrces for emphasizing pacification more, and search and destroy less . 
The ~·Iarine deployments and mission are covered in earlier decision 
studies in this series and \·1ill thus be treated only briefly here . 
The 
emphasis of this section is not on the i nf'luence the Marines had on the 
Honolulu conference, but on the way the !>larines gradually moved into their 
ne'''' r ole, and. the difficulties with it. 
The material here applied, there-
fore, equally to the pre- and post-Honolulu periods, throughout which the 
Marine successes , as they reported them, had a grmring impact on the think-
ing of civilian and military alike , in Saigon, CINCPAC, and Washington. 
The l,;arines landed. their first troops -- two Battalion landing Teams 
in De. Nang i n l·~ch of 1965 . 
Their original mission, "to secure enclaves 
in the northern region of Vietnam containing air and communications in-
stallations, was simplicity itself."?:.2/ 
(From "u .5. !>!ari ne Corps Civic 
Action Efforts in Vietnam, r-~ch 1965-March 1966, a study done by the USUC 
Historical Branch, SECRET; hereafter referred to as MC Histor;y:; from un-
paged draft . ) 
By the t ime of 'the Honolulu conf'erence the Marines -- by now organized 
into the III Nsrine Amphibious Force -- had changed their mission consider.-
ably, and to a degree then unequalled among other American units \.;as deeply 
engaged in pacification operations . 
A monthly report issued by General Krulak, Commanding General, Fleet 
Marine Force , Pacific, i ndicates the evolution of Marine t hinking on their 
mission. 
Revie\.;ing the first seven months of their deployment in I Corps , 
tbe Fleet !>:Iarine Force, Pacific, wrote in September, 1$165 : 
liThe Mission assigned III MAF was initially confi ned 
t o airfield security. 
Subsequently, a limited offensive 
respons i bi lity was added, which has gradually grown to an 
essentially unrestrained authority for offensive operations . 
Finally, and'largely on i ts own, III J.IAF bas entered the 
pacificatiorl. program, with the bulk of its pacification 
efforts taking place since June ." ["Emphasis adde§ J!Y 
One month later , after chronicling their successes , t he report i ndicated 
the major shift in strateGic thin.~ing which was taking place at General ~lalt I s 
headquarters in De Nang , and at General Krulak 1 s in Hawaii : 
16 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
I)cclassificd per Execull\e Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
ni-lhile accomplishing all this the Marines were feeling, 
with growing impact, a cardinal counterinsurgency principle : 
that if local forces do not move in promptly behind the 
offensive effort, then first line forces must be diverted to 
provide the essential hamlet security, pclice and stabilization . 
The alternative is to riSk the development of vacua, into whi ch 
t he VC guerrilla can flow. 
This condi tien grew during the 
period. 
The Popular Forces and police were inadequate in 
numbers and in quality to do their part of the job, as the 
Marines did theirs . 
This operated to complicate the :Marines I 
problem by making the civic action effort more difficult, 
by permitting harassment of our forces, and by maki ng possible 
a suicide attack on the Chu Lao and Marble Mountain areas . 
"The end of the period saw the 676 square mile III MAF 
area of influence more stable, more prosperous, and far more 
hopeful, but it saH also an urgent need for efficient regional 
or local forces to take up their proper burden, so the f.1arines 
can maintain the momentum of their search/clear/pacification 
efforts . It is plain that the most efficient way to bring this 
about is to give III f.U\F substantial authority over the RF or 
PF serving in this area, in order that they may be properly 
t rained and properly led. " 31/ 
This summary, written in the headquarters of the man often regarded as 
the philosopiler of the Marine Corps, shows the J.Iarines in the process 
of s\.linging their emphasis around - - turning away from the offensive 
against the enemy waiting in the nearby hillS, and towards the people 
and t he VC guerrillas among the people i nside their TAOR. 
It was a crucial, difficult decision for the men who made i t . 
Significantly, the indications are strong that the decision was made 
almost entirely inside ~1arine Corps channels, through a chain of 
cODlIlland that bypassed COMUSMACV and the civilian leaders of our 
govermn.ent, and ran from General Greene through General. Krulek to 
General Walt . 
The files do not reveal discussions of the implications, 
f easibi lity, cost, and desirabi lity of the Marine strategy ~ong bigh-
ranking off'icials in the Embassy J f.t4.CV headquarters, the Defense and 
State Departments . 
Yet in retrospect it seems cl ear t hat the strategy 
t he Marines proposed to follow, a strategy about which they made no 
secret, was in sharp vari ance with the strat·egy of the other U.S. uni ts 
in the country, with far -ranging political implications that could even 
affect the ultimate chances for negotiations . 
It should be clear that the Marine concept of operations has a 
different implicit time requirement tha~ a more enemy-oriented 
search and destroy effort . It is not within the scope o:f this paper 
t o analyze the different requirements, but it does appear that the 
r.1arine strategy, which General Walt sometimes described as the 
17 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I)cciassificd per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;Jle: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"wringing out of the VC from the land like you wring water out of a 
sponge, " is slow and methodical, requires vast numbers of troops, 
runs the risk of turning into an occupation even while being called 
"pacification/civic action, " and involves America..""ls deeply in t he 
pol itics and traiitions of rural Vietnem. 
The strategy can succeed, 
perhaps, but if it is to succeed, it must be UJldertaken With full 
awareness by the highest levels of the USG of its potential cost s i n 
manpower and time, and the exacting nature of the work . 
I nstead, the 
documents suggest that the Marines determined their strategy basically 
on their mm, deriving part of it from their own traditions in the 
"Banana Republics" and China (;~here Generals Halt, Kru1a..l<: , Nicker son, 
and others had. served in the 1930' s) I and partly f rom an attempt t o 
sol ve problems of an unprecedented nature ",hich were cropping up 
i nside their TAORs, even on the edge of the great air base at Da Nang . 
As i t ",as, the Marine strategy was judged successful, at least 
by the Marines, long before it had even had a real test . 
It was 
applauded by many observers before the VC had begun to react to i t , 
and as such, encouraged imitators while it was still unproven . 
The Marine dilemma was hOlr to support the paci fication effort 
without taking it over. 
They thought they had succeeded in doing 
this by "self-effacing support for Vietne.mese rural construction" 
after August of 1965, but there is much contradictory eVidence on 
this point. 
The r·1arines t hemselves, according to the classified 
historical study they recently produced, understood that thei r pacifi ca-
tion ;fork bad n to functi on through local Vietnamese officials . 
The 
t endency to produce Marine Corps programs or to work 
' democratical~ ' 
through individuals had to be strictly controlled. 
Only Vietnamese 
programs could be t olerated and support of these programs had to take 
place through Vietnemese governing officials . .. " 32/ 
But despite thei r good intentions to work through t he existing 
GVN structure, the f.iarines i'oWld in many cases that the existing 
structure barely existed, except on paper, and i n other cases t hat 
t he existing structure was too slow and too corrupt for their require -
ments . 
And gradually the Marines got mor e deeply into the poll t i cs 
of rural Vietnam than they had intended, or presumably desired. 
Their difficulties "rer e great est in the area of highest priori t y , 
the National Priority Area (as i t was t o be desi gnated in October 1965) 
sout h of Da Nang . 
I n a ni ne -village complex just south of the air base, 
t he l.fa.rines urged upon t he GVN successful completion of a special. 
pacification plVgram which had been des:"gned hy t hem in close conj unc -
tion ';lith the Quang r:am Daputy Province Chief . 
The nine vil l ages were 
divided into two groups, and the first phase, scheduled for completion 
first in December of 1965, included only five of the villages, with 
only 23,000 people living i n them. 
By February, 1966, t he plan had 
slipped conSiderably, and the projected completion.date for the f irst 
18 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I)cclassificcl per EXCI.'utlve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
:five villages was pushed back to April, 1966. 
The GVN and the Marines 
considered their control to extend to over 16,000 of the 23, 000 people 
i n the area, but, according to an Embassy evaluation of the area, only 
682 were yotUlg men between the ages of 17 and 30 . It was clear that 
the t<1arines were trying to pacif'y an area in which the young men no 
longer lived, having either been drafted, joined the ve, or gone to 
Da Nang to work for the Americans . 
liThe basic problem posed by this 
lack of manpower must be solved before the area can be expected to 
partiCipate in its own defense, II the Embassy report said. 
HUntil it 
is solved, the to1a.rines and the ARVN will remain tied to defensive 
mission involving the.-n with the population. 
No one in Quang Nam sees 
any inunediate solution to this dilermna . II 
The report concluded with a 
description of' hm-T over-involved with local politics the Marines 'Here 
becoming, unintentionally, and said: 
liThe plan, despj.te the valiant efforts of the Marines, 
is in trouble, caused by a confused and fragmented chain of 
command, a lack of skilled cadre, inability to recruit 
locally RF and PF -- and the open opposition of the VNQDD . 11 33/ 
The VNQDD, or Vietnam Quoc Dan Dang, was the political party 
controlling the provinces of' Quang Ngai, Quang Nam, and Quang Tin . 
The Marines knelT little about them, although, according to the study, 
all the village chiefs in the area. were VNQDD members . 
The VNQDD 
were not supporting the priority area plan because they had not been 
consulted in its formulation, and for this reason, and others, the 
report predicted the failure of the plen 1 despite the heavy Marine 
conuni tment . 
Like Hop Tec, it was an unusually difficult Situation, but it 
illustrates the problems that the 1,12.rines, and any other U. S. troops 
that got deeply involved in pacification, confronted in Vietnam. 
19 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Exectltl ve Order J 3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Ntlmber: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
D. 
VTashinv,ton Grumbles About the Effort 
Throughout the period of the buildup in Vietnam, there was a 
growing chorus of discontent in Washington over the management of'the 
U.S. effo:~ in Vietnam, most of it directed at the civilian agencies __ 
USIA, AID, and the CIA. 
Unhappiness ,ri th the way the l4ission ran was 
to lead to three major reorganizations in the l5-month period from the 
Honolulu conf'erence to the arr1 val of .Ambassador EllS\lOrth Bunker . 
The 
first reorganization took place immediately after Honolulu, and assigned 
to the Deputy Ambassador, Hilliam J . Porter, specific duties and 
r esponsibilities which had previously been dispersed throughout the 
Mission and ha.'ldled on an ~ hoc basis , 
The second reorganization, 
which took place in November-December 1966, reorganized the internal' 
components of P.ID, USIA, end the CIA so that the Deputy Ambassador 
could control directly a Single Office of Civi l Operation (OCO) , by-
passing the Lgency chiefs . 
The latest reorganization, which was 
announced in Ne.y 1967, transferred responsibility for OCO from the 
Deputy Ambassador to CO!·1J~·1ACV, who in turn was given a civilian Deputy 
with the rank of Ambassador (R. W. Komer) . 
This section outlines events· 
l eading to the first reorganization in l.farch 1966, a reorganization which 
raised the priority of the pacification effort, but left most of the 
basic problems in the U.S. Nission unsolved . 
The actual reorganization, 
and its effects, will be covered in Part III . 1. 
Efforts to reorganiz.e the Saigon l·1ission are a recurring theme in 
recent history . 
The impetus for reorganization has consistently come 
from vlashington J and the IUssion has usually resisted. Its resistance 
i s not hard to understand, since almost every reorganization scheme 
t ended to diminish the authority end autonomy of senior members of the 
Mission Council such as the JUSPAO Director, the USAID Dtrector, . and the 
CIA Stati on Chief . 
Skeptics have said that whenever things are going poorly, "Americans 
reorganize , " But the opponents of various reorganization schemes have 
been unable to defend the existing llission Council system, which must 
definitely be rated one of Vietnam ' s casualties . 
Not since the beginning 
of the "country team" concept in the 1950 1 s ("Mission Council" being 
another term for the seme structure) had the concept been tested the 
way it wes to be tested in Vietnam. 
?ne pressure of events, the tension, 
the unprecedented size of the agencies and a host of other factors made 
the system shaky even under the strong manager Ma.'CWell Taylor, 
Under 
the man who didn ' t want to manage, Lodge, it began to crumble . 
Each 
agency bed its own ideas on what had to be done, its own communication 
channels with Ha3hington, its own personnel ar.d administrative structure 
and starting in 1964-65, each agency bega.'1 to have its own field personnel 
operating under separate and parallel chains of command. 
This latter 
event ,res ultimately to prove the one vhich gave reorganization efforts 
such force, since it began to become clear to people i n Washington and 
.Saigon alike that the Anericans in the provinces were not always wor king 
20 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;Jlc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
on the same teeml and that they were receiving conflicting or over-
lapping instructions from a variety of sources in Saigon and vfashington . 
Still, while General Taylor was Ambassador 1 reorganization was 
not something to be pushed seriously by Hashin3ton . 
"11th Lodge back 
in charge , it was a different story. 
As a matter of fact, so serious 
were Lodge ' s managerial deficiencies that even during his first tour, 
when the U.S. ~lission was less than 20,000 men, and the entire 
civilian component under 1,000, there was talk of reorganization . 
In 
a personal message to Lodge on May 26, 1964, the President made the 
f ollowing prophetic statement : 
"I have received from !l.tike7 Forrestal a direct aCCOtu1t 
of your belief that there is need for change and improve-
ment in the civilian side of the country team . 
He have 
reached a similar conclusion here J and indeed we believe it 
is essential for you to have a top-ranking officer who is 
wholly acceptable to you as chief of staff for COtu1try team 
operations . 
My own impression is that this should be either 
a newly appointed civilian of ~dde governmental experience 
and high standing, or General l1estmol'eland . ... II 34/ 
This message became irrelevant when Lodge suddenly reSi gned in Jtu1e 
of 1964 to assist Governor Scranton ls bid for the Republican nomination, 
but it shows that the President, Lodge, and apparently other people in 
Hasbington had deep concern with the structure of the Mission at this 
early date . 
By sending Taylor and Alexis Johnson -- then the State Department ' s 
highest-ranking Foreign Service Of~icer -- to Saigon in July o£ 1964, 
the President in effect put off any Hashington-initiated reorganiza-
t ions for the length o£ Taylor I s tour, since no one in \fashington could 
t ell the fonner Chairman of the JCS hov to run a mission. 
T~lor organized the Mission Council -- not a new invention, but a 
f ormalization of the country team into a body which met once a week, 
with agendas, minutes, and records of decisions . 
Taylor was particularly 
concerned that the Mission Council should have a "satisfactory meshing 
with ... coWlterpart activities on the GVN side . II 35/ 
And while he was 
Ambassador the U. S. made a determined e£fort to make the system work 
without reorganization. 
In a letter to Elbridge Durbrow, who was once 
American Ambassador in Saigon himself, Alexis Johnson descri bed t he 
system: 
"Max and I dropped the title I Country Team I and set up 
what we called the '1·11ssion CmU1cil l on a formalized basis. 
In add1 tion to Nax a.."ld ll'.yself, the members were General 
Westmoreland, Barry Zorthian as JUSPAO (Joint United States 
Pu.blic Ai'fairs Office - - this covered both "MA(N and Embassy 
21 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified pcr ExecUllve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
info as well as psychological operations in the field and against 
the DRV), the Director of USOM end the CAS Station Chief. 
He 
established an Executive Secretary who was first Bill Sullivan 
and later Jack Herfurt 1 ''{ho was charged with the preparation of 
agenda1 the recording of decisions 1 and, n~st importantly, 
following up and monitoring of decisions that were ta~en . 
We met regularly once a "reek (with occasional special meetings 
as required), with paper circulated beforehand insofar as 
possible . 
One of the responsibilities of the Executive secre-
tary was to see that issues were worked out beforehand at 
staff level insofar as possible and the remaining issues 
clearly defined .... It was normally our practice to keep all 
members of the Council fully infonned and to discuss all questions, 
regardless of their sensitivity . .. . After an informal exchange 
of views, we took up questions on the agenda, doing our best 
to obtain the consensus of all members . 
"Then in rare cases 
this was not achieved, the Ambassador of course took the 
decision. 
We considered the full range of questions, including 
such fundamental ones as when and under what circumstances ,./e 
should bomb the North . . . etc . . . Belo\-! the l-1ission Council level 
we established a series o~ committees in problem areas involving 
more than one agency of the mission, chaired by the agency of 
primary interest. 
These committees were responsible directly 
to the Mission CounciL ... \fe persuaded thc GVN, on its Side, 
to set up a similar organization that was first called the 
'Pacification Council ' and later the 'Rural Construction 
Council. ' . . . . The GVl'I Council and the Mission Council met to -
gether once a ,reek with an agenda prepared beforehand by the 
two Executive Secretarics .. . One of my theories , and to a degree 
I think it was borne out in Saigon, was that the Mission Counci~ 
and the Joint Counci~ were important not so much for what was in 
fact decided at the meetings but for the fact that their 
existence, and the necessity of reporting to them, acted as a 
spur to the staff peop~e to get things done and to resolve 
issues at their level. Organization structure of course does 
not assure brilliant performance, but I do take some satis-
faction in feeling that, due to the organizational structure 
that we established, we established the habit of the Mission 
elements 8J1d the GVlT and the Mission, working together in a 
more effective way. n 36/ 
vlliether or not the system described by Ambassador Johnson above 
really worked the W8lf he says it was supposed to is not the subject of 
this stU<l¥ . 
But it appears that 'Wi thin a few 'lonths after Lodge 
returned as Ambassador the people 'Within the USG advocating reorganiza-
tion as at least a partial solution to the problems of the ~tission were 
once again in full cry. 
22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecUllve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The relationship of the reorganizers to the pacifiers must be 
explained. 
Those who advocated restructuring the MiSSion for more 
effective management were not necessarily the same people advocating 
a higber emphasi~ for pacification. 
But usually, since the organiza-
tion of the Miss10n was so obviously deficient, both groups of people 
would end up advocating some kind of change -- and even if they dis -
88reed on the nature of the change, the most important fact was that 
they were generally pushing a similar mood of dissatisfaction with the 
Mission upon the high-ranking officials with whom they might come in 
contact . 
(It should be kept in mind that they were really not groups 
at all, in the nonnel sense of the ~Tord, but a shifting collection of' 
individuals ~dth varying degrees of loyalty to either their parent 
agency or their mm sense of history; and on each individual issue a 
different set of allies and antagonists might well exist . ) 
The efforts of those advocating reorganization began to bear 
edible fruit in December 1965 and January 1966, "hen a conference was 
held at '-1arrenton, Va., to which the Mission sent an impressive collec -
tion of Mission Council members : 
Deputy Ambassador Porter, USAID 
Mission Director l-1a.nn, JUSPAO Director Zorthian, Political Counsellor 
Habib, C~neral Lansdale, CIA Station Chief Jorgenson, and Brigadier 
General Collins, representing HesUnoreland. 
From WaShington came the 
second and third echelons of the bureaucracy : 
Leonard Unger J Deputy 
Assistant Secretary of State ; Rutherford Poats, Assistent Adminis-
trator of AID; 1-1ajor General Peers, SJI.cSAj Alvin Friedman, lSAj 
William Colby and Peer aa Silva, CIA; Chester Cooper, \'1h1te House; 
and Sanford Marlowe, USIA . 
Other participants included : 
l-1ajor General 
Hutchins, CINCPAC; .Rufus Phillips of Lansdale ' s group; Charles Z'\dck 
and Henry Rauen of BOB; George Lodge, the Alnbassador ' s son; Desmond 
Fitzgerald, CIA; and Leon Goure, of RlIND . 
The purpose of' the meeting was to "bring together senior repre -
sentatives of the U.S . MiSSion, Saigon, the Vietnam Coordinating 
Cotm!li ttee, Hashington, and several other individuals to (a) review 
the joint GVN-US pacification/rural construction program and seek to 
promote its more effective operation and (b) address the problem of 
the increasingly serious shortages and bottlenecks in manpower, 
materials, and transport in Vietnam and to designate priorities and 
machinery for resources control and allocation . " 
The major unstated 
purpose, in addition to those mentioned above, was to discuss the 
organization of the U,S. Hission in Vietnam. 
i-Tarrenton was to turn out to be a prelude to Honolulu, and as such 
its recommendations never were to become an integral part of the 
Mission's plans and strategy. 
But the direction that was developed at 
Warrenton is significant, because it represents the clear and unmis-
ta..\;.able thrust that existed at the time in the "working levelS" of both 
Saigon and Hashington . 
G1 Yen the normal time lag before individual 
thoughts cen reach the stage of agreed-upon committee-produced papers, 
23 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;Jlc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Harrenton, we can assume, reflected the evolution of thinking that had 
been going on, particularly among the civilians, as the first year of 
U.S. combat troop and deplo;yment began to end. 
Indeed, in i ts ca~ch -all 
approach to pacification , Harrenton had somethIng for everyone . 
The final reconnnendations from the Harrenton conference were addressed 
to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Admiral Raborn, Mr . Bell, to1r. Marks, 
and Mr . 
f.IcGeorge Bundy, from the meeting ' s co-chairmen, A'Tlbassad.or Unger 
and Ambassador Porter. 
The conclusions included the following points 
(with comments as required) : 
1. 
"There was a consen~us that the designation of 
priority rural construction areas for 1966 was important 
and that the modest goals set for these areas '.rere 
realistic . 
However, it was emphasized that the contrast 
between the massive input of U. S. resources and the 
modest priority area goals made success in those areas 
imperative ... II 37/ 
COMMENT : The National Priority Areas did not meet their 1966 goals . 
2. 
"In view of the prime importance to the U.S. of 
success in the four National Priority Areas, there was 
discussion of the need for designating U. S. teem chiefs 
to head the U.S. advisory effort in those areaS. It Was 
agreed that the U.S. l-iission COWlcil would consider this 
matter promptly and report its conclusions to the VNCC . II 38/ 
COMl·OOIT : The designation of teem chiefs for the priority areas did not 
take ulace . 
Here is another example of the Washington effort to 
r eorgMize Saigon, with Saigon resisUng . 
3. 
IIThere was widespread recognition of the need 
to provide within the U.S. Mission a single focus of 
operational control and management over the full range 
of the pertinent U.S. efforts in order to gear all such 
U.S. activities and resources ef~ectively into implementa-
t ion or the rural construction concept . 
However, some 
concern was expressed that too drastic organizational 
changes within the U.S. Mission would create problems with 
the cOWlteryart GVN organization and would not ensure 
success of rural construction programs . 
No egreement was 
reach~d on the precise form for org~ization changes but 
there was general consensus that the focal point of control 
and management had to rest just below the Ambassador and 
that there must be a sepior Mission official solely concerned 
with this subject . 
Disagreement was registered as to : . (1) 
~hether the Deputy ftJnbassador, assisted by a s~aff, should 
serve this function or whether another senior official 
24 
TOP SECRET - Sensltive 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
(perhaps a second Deputy Ambassador) should be appointed; and 
(2) t-ihat extent individual agency personnel, funds, and opera-
tions devoted to rural construction could and should be broken 
out of agency organizations and placed under the direction of 
the single focal point ... 11 39/ 
COWriENT : 
Here was the compromise wording on the issue which concerned 
the participants at "Tarrenton a great deal . 
Each r epresentative at 
Harrenton brought with him a proposed organization chart for the 
Mission (see below), but no agreement could be reached at that time. 
In the main body of the memorandum to the principals on January 13, 
1966, Unger and Porter wrote : 
"The optinrnm organization for the U.S . Mission for 
its support'of the rural construction/pacification 
program -- a senior official with a eupporting staff with 
full-time responsibility in this field was considered 
necessary . 
(Coordination is also required with Ambassador 
Lodge and Mr. Bellon this point . ) It would also be 
desirable for such an official to have in Hashington a 
bigh-level point of l i aison to assure the expeditious 
discharge here of urgent Vietnam business in thi s field . .. n 40/ 
~1hen he reported to the Mission Liaison Group on Harrenton 
two weeks later, on Je..'1uary 27, 1966, Porter sharply downplayed the 
move for reorganization which was coming from Hashington and changed 
the emphasis . 
He said: 
"a. 
No decisi on was reached at '{arrenton with 
r espect to a U.S. in -country organization for rural'con -
struction , although the possibility of a single manager 
.... '8.S di scussed. 
"b . 
·The U. S. Mission will continue to SUDDort Rural 
Construction with the same organizational structure it is now 
using , placing particular reliance on the M:ission Liaison Group , 
"c. Officials in ~lashington were concerned about teamwork 
among the U. S. agencies in Vietnam but not about abil ity t o do 
t he j ob . 
Differences of opinion are expected, and machinery 
exists to resolve them . 
Differences due to per sonalities can -
not be tolerated. 
"d . 
I'; is clearly W'lderstood in vfashington that military 
operations alone are not enough) ~'1d that effective Rural 
Construction i s imperative . 
The highest level s i n the USG 
are keenly aware of the importance of usjGVn work in Rural 
Construction . .. " 41/ ffinphasis Addei/ 
25 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I)cciassificd per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;Jle: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Although not much more than a footnote now, the reorganization 
schemes that were presented at Harrenton deserve brief mention . 
At 
Warrenton, the participa.'1ts were still fishing for ways and mea.'1s·, 
a.'1d their proposals reveal to a limited extent the intent of each 
agency when faced, three months later, w'ith a new structure in both 
Saigon a'1d Washington - - with Porter in charge in Saigon and Komer 
in business in the llhite House (discussed in III, 1 & 2) . 
--Chester Cooper, working for 11cGeorge Bundy in the ifuite 
House , proposed a second Deputy Junbassador for Pacifica-
tion, with control over CIA, USAID, JUSPAO, and partial 
control (not clarified) over r.1ACV ' s Rural Construction 
advisors . 
Cooper also wanted a "Hashington representative" 
in Saigon to expedite resource allocation . 
He was ambiguous 
about Lansdale's role. 
Cooper advocated a unified field 
chain of COIImlB.:1d. 
- -Poats and Mann submitted a joint i·lashington -Saigon proposal 
on behalf of AID (another clear indication of the fact that 
the real chains of command ran through agency channels, 
rather than through the Ambassador to ifashington) . 
They 
advocated a complicated arrangement in which a Chief of 
Staff for Pacification would head up special task forces 
"drawn from operating agencies but staying in their opera-
tional job in their agencies . \I 
AID in effect wanted no 
major change in the Hission, and particularly opposed any 
change in the multiplicity of chains of command in the 
provinces . 
They also advocated a Theater CINC, a resources 
allocation committee chaired by the AID Mission Director, 
and a I·1ACV advisory structure that is partially under the 
Ambassador and partially separate (not clarified) . 
Zorthian suggested that the Deputy Ambassador coordinate all 
pacification activities but made it clear that he would make 
no change in the chains of command. 
Indeed, he emphaSized 
the direct access of each Mission Council member to the 
Ambassador, the separateness of each agency ' s field program . 
MCSA proposed a division of I.fJ\.CV into a tactical unit com-
mand and a Pacification command, 
All civilian elements 
supporting pacification w~uld be under the Deputy for 
Pacification, who in turn would report to the Ambassador 
and Deputy ftJl1.bassedor . 
The advisory structure would have 
been split down the middle between tact~.cal unit advisors 
and prOVince/district advisors . 
GeneraL Collins suggested no major change in the structure 
of the Mission, but advocated the fOl:.mation of "Task Groups 
to deal with speci fic problems organized on ftO ad hoc 
• 
26 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I)cclassificd per Execull\e Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
basis ~rom personnel provided by interested agencies. 
The 
Deputy Ambassador to be relieved o~ routine duties and to 
spend substantially all his time on rural construction 
duties . . . 
The State Department proposed a "Central Pacification 
Organization" which would have been not more than a 
coordinating committee for the existing agencies. 42/ 
What these reorganization proposals seem to suggest, in light o~ 
the ultimate direction that the l·lission took, is that when agencies 
are asked to produce suggestions which may reduce or inhibit their 
prerogatives, they are unlikely to do so in a manner responsive to 
the requirements o~ their politically-appointed chieftains . 
The 
prerogatives and privileges of the agencies inevitably come ~irst. 
One does not reorganize voluntarily; the impetus comes from without . 
This is also seen in the di~~erent attitude that the reorganizers 
had towards Hashington and Saigon. 
Al though the same problem in 
coordination existed (~~d still exists) in Washington as in Saigon, 
the Washington o~ficials always .... ·ere ready to tell Saigon how to 
clean up its house, but were slov' to suggest self-improvements. 
At 
Warrenton, perhaps prodded by the Saigon representatives, they did 
take note of the matter, although they were reluctant to suggest a 
clear solution : 
"Note was also taken o~ the inadequacy o~ present 
U. S. Government machinery to handle Vietnam problems 
quickly end decisively. 
The need ~or referral o~ too 
large a number of problems to the Secretarial level was 
one o~ the problems mentioned. 
i'1hile the meeting did not 
have time to come to any f'irm conclusions, there was a 
view that the VNCC because of its coordinating, rather than 
decision-cum-enforcement pO.Ters could not per~onn this task 
except in part . If endowing the VNCC or its Chairman with 
larger powers, and with a staff' associated with no one agency, 
is not a feasible solution, it was considered that the 
required directing position might have to be set up at a 
higher level, perhaps related to the National Security 
Council. It 43/ 
In the Harrenton report, then, all the events of the coming year 
were ~oreshadowed, and, reading between the lines, one can no.' see 
what was coming .. Unfortunately, and obviously, this was not the 
case at the time--particular1.y ~or the rUssian in Saigon . 
27 
TOP'SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
. E. 
Presidential Enrohasis on "The Other War" and Press Reaction 
At the end of 1965, 'Ni th the bombing of the north in 1 ts tenth 
month, and our ground forces growing steadily, the Administration was 
m~~ng a determined effort to emphasize those American activities in 
Vietnam which diu not directly involve guns anu fighting . 
This emphasis 
on what came to be called the "Other War" reached a high point during 
the conference at Honolulu in February of 1966. 
The emphasis on the 
other war did not necessarily have to lead, as it did, to are- emphasis 
of pacification; that ~Ias a by-product, at least in part , of the renewed 
support for pacification ~{hich had been coming from Ambassador Lodge, the 
Marines, the CIA (with their cadre), and the advocates of organizational 
reform (all covered in previous sections) . 
But the two themes merged at 
Honolulu, ~~d thus, out of the conference, came the first clear statement 
of Presidential support to pacification. 
The need of the Administration to emphasize and publicize the non-
military aspects of the war needs little amplification. 
Few documents 
shm{ this emphasis in the pre-Honolulu period, since it was so obvious . 
In an exception, a joint State-USIA message dated October 4, 1965 , 
Washington told the Saigon J·lission: 
"There is continuing concern at the highest levels 
here regarding need to emphasize our non-military programs 
1n Vietnam and give them m~imum possible~ublic exposure 
both in U. S. and abroad. 
LEmphasis Adde91 
"We recognize that the russion is fully cognizant of 
this proble~ and already has underway measures to broaden 
public knowledge and understanding of non-military activities • .. 
We are also conscious of difficulties involved in enlisting 
greater press interest in these developments when it finds 
military actions more dramatic and ne"Tsworthy. 
Nevertheless, 
w~ hope w~ll continue to give non-military progracs increasing 
priority: •• " ill 
It is useful to recall the situation which existed in February of 1966, 
when the President went to Honolulu to meet ",ith Ky and Thieu. 
On 
January 30, 1966, the bombing of the North began again, after a 37-day 
pause . 
There were 197,000 American servicemen in Vietnam by February 1. 
The Hashington Post -- which supported the Administrf.tion 
u 
editorial-
ized on February 1: 
"It is to be hoped that a new look is being taken at 
the military tactics in the South so that ~reater emphasis 
can be put on the safety of civilians, the rehabilitation 
of the countryside, the furtherance of economic growth .... 
Efforts behind the lines at economic and social programs 
must be increased. " !t2J 
28 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecUllve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DOlle: 2011 
TOP SECRET '- Sensitive 
Senator Fulbright had launched his public hearings on Vietnam, and 
on February 4 had subjected David Bell of AID to a nearly four -hour 
grilling in the committee . 
That same day, the conference "''as announced. 
The emphasis at Honolulu was clear tram before the conference 
started. In his press conference announcing the meeting, the President 
said that he ...,ould take Secretary Freeman end Secretary Gardner, not 
previously involved in Vietnam, as well as experts from their sta:rfs . 
Freeman Ifould go on to Saigon, the President added "to explore and 
inaugurate certain paCification progrerns in the fields of health, 
education, and agriculture . II 
The President then added : 
"He are going to emphasize, in every '"'ay we can, in 
line witl;1 the very fine pronouncements that the Prime 
ltinister &7 has made concerning his desires in the field 
of educetion and health and agriculture . 
rTe want to be 
sure that we have our best planning and our maximum effort 
put into it. But we will, of course, go into the military 
briefing very thoroughly ... " 46/ 
Even before the conference began, there "Jere early reactions 
the press to this emphasis . 
The New York Times editorialized on 
February 6: 
from 
"Programs in health, education end agriculture of the 
kind President Johnson evidently has in mind, can ma.'l{.e an 
important contribution. 
To combat the revolutionary idea 
the Communists have set loose in Vietna~, a better idea 15 
needed. 
Vigorous social reform - - end part.icularly) land 
reform, which has received little more than lip-service so 
far -- could well be made the price of increased economic 
aid, ,",hich is now to be doubled . 
"But an effort to seek political ' victory' in South 
Vietnam is likely to prove as fruitless as the long 
attempt at military ' victory. ' 
A more limited a.~d 
r ealistiC objective is essential." 47/ 
The conference itself) and its repercussions both in Hashington 
and Vietnam) will be discussed in a following section) so there is 
little need to dt{ell on the pre-Honolulu period. 
In Saigon, where 
the word of the conference barely preceded the departure of the 
partiCipants, the Hew York Times bureau chief wrote a perceptive 
articl.e which reflected thinking of many juniur and mid-level 
officials in both the U.S. rUssion and the GYM . 
The theme it stated 
Was not new then, end still has a very femiliar ring today: 
" . . . There are now 230,000 to 250,000 pro-Co:amunist 
troops in South Vietnam, including the Vietcong guerrillas 
• 
29 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per E."l:ecu\1vc Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and about 11 tough regiments of the North Vietnamese Army . 
That is at least twice as many enemy troops as there were at 
the start of last year, despite the major United States 
build-up since then . 
"This does not mean that the American build-up has been 
futile : the build-up Has all that saved South Vietnam, in 
the view of most experts . It does mean that no ~ 
has yet 
been found to prevent the enemy from matching an American 
build-up ~~th a build-up of his own . 
"About 200,000 American troops are now in South Vietnazn 
along with 550,000 South Vietnamese armed men J of whom about 
half are well-trained army troops , 
"American and South Vietnamese military officers have 
asked for more American troops, requesting a force of about 
400,000 men by the end of 1966, 
Not all of this strength 
has been pl'omised by President Johnson, but major reinforce -
ments are already in the offing . . . 
"But while 1966 will be an important year militarily J 
one in which all generals assume that there will be bloodier 
fighting, it will also be a year of increased emphasis on 
the subtle political and social aspects of the struggle . 
"The Honolulu coni'erence "rill in fact concentrate 
largely on economic, social and political problems, 
according to informed sources . 
"It is felt in Saigon, however, that the Johnson 
Administration cannot, even with the best of intentions, 
guarantee the allegiance of the Vietnamese to their Govern-
ment merely by pumping more money and technical skill into 
South Vietnam to give people the Ibetter life I of which 
officials speak. 
"At least 20 to 25 per cent of the country' s area is 
so finnly in control of the Vietcong guerrillas that no civic 
,and political programs are possible there at all. Other 
large areas are so sharply contested that for the time being 
pacification and rural-improvement workers cannot operate . 
uThus. rural-pacification wor}: in 1966 is to be concen-
trated in one-third or fewer of the rural hamlets that the 
Government already claims to control. 
The limitation implies 
an admission that after five years of war the alli~s are 
starting from scratch in this field, and that progress must 
be slow. 
30 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;Jlc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
'lWith krierica.'1 enthusiasm, the United States may wish 
to speed the pace of pacification, but there will be serious 
obstacles . 
Most of the sadder but wiser veterans of previous 
programs in Vietnam seem convinced that pressure from 
Washington lor higher and more seductive 3tatistical goals 
15 a major danger . 
They counsel ' slowly but surely . 1 
11As an example, the South Vietnamese Goverrunent i s 
trying to turn 23, 000 rural-affairs workers , most of them 
originally trained only in armed propaganda ~~rk, into 
more rounded rural-construction workers . 
!lI t then plans to recruit and train 19, 000 more workers , 
for a total of 42,000. 
In the opinion of some officials, 
it will be very difficult even to reach this goal, and 
~ 
great expansion carries a risk of substituting numbers 
for real training. 
liThe present pacification plan is considered imagina-
tive and sound by experts with long experience in Vietnam, 
but it is conSidered certein thet the plan could be improved 
at Honolulu. 
llE:xperience ha.s shmID that the crucial metter in 
Vietnam is a].lTaYS execution rather than plaIIDing . 
The 
scarcest resources in the country are manpower and leader-
ship . 
lilt is generally agreed that it would not be enough, 
say, ~or the United States to offer help in improving 
agriculture in the South Vietnamese countryside . 
The 
Americans must also conSider, it is felt, whether their 
suggested plan is one that the South Vietnamese understand 
and actually -- rather than merely politely - - approve , and 
whether the badly strained South Vietnsmese administration 
can execute the plan. 
I1American experts in Saigon also assert that the highly 
i deological Vietcong movement cannot be offset merely by 
offers of a ' better life ' for the peasants . 
liThe Vietcong have a l.oyal, dedicated and highly dis -
ciplined underground political structure that operates in 
the heart 0f Seigon itself and in thousar.ds of hamlets . 
So far the peasants have shoVl'l little inclination to inform 
on this structure and to help the Government activity. 
llThis is the central problem of the South Vietnamese 
war ... " 48/ 
Charles Mohr 
31 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Occlassificd per Execut1ve Order 13526. Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
F . 
Me-am.,rhile, Back a.t the H'ar 
The re-emphasis of pacification was , of course, a far more dis-
orderly process than any written revie\·" can suggest, end unfortunately 
must overlook oany events and reconmendations which were not central 
to the re-emph.'1sis of pacification . 
But it is useful and important to 
r eview briefly "That the Mission was reporting to Hashington about the 
overall effort during 1965 , since Saigon ' s reports should have formed 
an important part of the background for decision . 
This selection should be read not as the "objective" story of what 
was happening in Vietnam - - such an objective study i s simply not possible 
at this time, even if we had access to enemy thinking - - but as a reflec-
tion of the beliefs of the Americans in Saigon, and as a reflection of 
what the Mission wanted ldashington to believe . 
This selection is entirely direct quotations !'rom MACV ' s Monthly 
Evaluat ion Report . 
Each month this report began with a summary of the 
month's events, and the follOYling i terns represent the running evaluation 
for 1965: ffimphasis Addei[/ 
"January, 1965: 
Revie'" of military events in January tend to 
induce a decidedly more optinistic vie'" than has been seen in 
l'ecent months . 
Despite adverse influence exerted by national 
level political disorders and localized Buddhist/student riot-
ing, the military expe rienced the most successful single month 
of the counterinsurgency effort . . . Pacificat ion made little 
progress this month . 
Although some gains ';,ere made in the 
Hop Tec area, effort in the remainder of RVN was hampered by 
political activity and religious and student disorders . .. If 
the RVNAF capability can be under.rritten by political sta-=-
bility and durability, a Significant turning point in the war 
could be forthcoming. 
"February, 1965 : 
.. . GVN forces continued to make progress in 
III and IV CTZ, maintained a tenuous balance over the VC in 
I CTZ, and suffered general regression in II CTZ . .. The indi-
cators of RVNAF operational. effort . . . all showed a decline . 
However, losses on both sides remained high due to the 
violence of encounters and VC tenacity ..• The long term effect 
of events in, February is impossible to foretell . It is ob-
vious that th.e complexion of the .. rar has changed. 
The VC 
appear to be making a concerted effort to isolate the northern 
portion of RVlf by seizing a salient to the sea in the northern 
part of II CTZ. 
Here RVNAF has lost the initiative, . at least 
temporarily. 
Ho'.'rever, US/GYri strikes against DRV end increased 
use of U. S . jet aircraft in RV1~ has had a salutary effect on 
32 
TOP SECR.!.""T - Sensi ti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
both military and civilian morale l;ihich may r esult in a greater 
national effort and , hopefully, reverse the dmmward trend. 
"March, 1965: 
Events in Narch were encouraging ... RVNAF ground 
operations ",ere highlighted by r enewed op€rational effort ... VC 
activity was considerably below the norm of the preceding six 
months and indications were that the enemy was engaged in the 
re ~ supply and re-positioning of units possibly in preparation 
for a new offensive , probably in the II Corps area ••. ln summary, 
Harch has given ri se to some cautious optimism. 
The current 
government appears to be t~~in g control of the situation and , 
if the pr esent state of popular morale can be sustained and 
strengthened, the GVN , with continued U. S. support, should be 
able to counter future VC offenses successfully . 
"April, 1905 : 
Friendly fOrces retained the initiative during 
April and a revie':l of events reinforces the f eeling of optimism 
generated l ast month . .. ln summary, current trends are highly 
encouraging and the GVN may have actually turned the tide at 
long last . 
Hm"ever, there are some disquieting factors "'hich 
indicate a need to avoid overconfidence. 
A test of these 
t rends should be forthcoming in the next few months if the 
VC l aunch their expected counter-offensive and the period may 
well be one of the most important of the " .. ar . 
IIl.fay , 1965 : 
The encouraging trends of the past fe,., months did 
not carry through into Nay and there " .. ere some serious setbacks . 
Hm .. ever , it is hoped that the high morale and improved disci-
pline and leadership ,,;hich has developed during that period will 
sustain future GVN efforts ... 
"June, 1965 : 
During JW1e the military situation in the RVN con-
tinued to worsen despite a fe .. , bright spots occasioned by RVNAF 
successes . 
In general , hOl1ever, the VC ... retained the initiative 
having launched several well-coordinated, savage attacks in 
r egimental strength, .. 
"July, 1965: 
An overall analysi s of the military situation at 
t he end of July reveals that GVN forces continued to make pro-
gress in IV Corps , maintained a limited edge in I Corps with the 
increased USMC effort and suffered a general regression 1.-'1 the 
north"'rn port i on of III Corps as "rell as in the central highlands 
of n Corps .. T.he VC monsoon offensive, , .. hich was so effective in 
June, f alt el ed during July as VC casualty figures reached a new 
~ 
.. . 
"August , 1965 : 
AJl evaluation of the overall militar;y effort in 
.Au$¥st reveals several encouraging facts . 
The most pronounced 
is the steady increase in the number of VC casualties and the 
33 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExeculI\<e Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
number of VC "ralliers" to the GVN . .. In sunnnary, the general 
increase in offensive operations by GVN , U. S. and Third Country 
forces and a correlative increase in enemy casualties have kept 
the VC off balance and prevented his interfere~ce with the 
build-up of U. S. forces . 
The often spokeL of ve "monsoon offen-
sive" has not materialized, and it no., appears that the VC have 
r elinquished the initiati ve in the conduct of the war . 
"September, 1965: 
As the end of the monsoon season approached, 
the military situation appears considerably brighter than in 
May \Ihen the VC threatened to defeat the RVNAF . 
Since Hay the 
build- 1.1P of Free Horld Nilitary Assistance Forces, coupled with 
aggressive combat operations, has thwarted VC plans and has laid 
the foundation for the eventual defeat of the ve ... 
ItOctober, 1965: 
. . . an increase in magnitude and tempo of engage -
ments as the GVN/F'.-lF maintained the initiative ... In sUllltlary, the 
military situation during October continued to favor the Allies 
as the VC experienced heavy casualties from t.he overvlhelming 
Allied fire power ..• 
ItNovember l 1965: 
The increasin tem'OO of the war was r eflected 
in casualt totals .,hich reached ne',; hi hs for VC PAVN and 
friend! forces ... While keeping the eneny generally off balance , 
GVN nn-,!AF were able to maintain and , to some degree, to increase 
the scope and intensity of friendly- initiated operations . 
"Decenber , 1965: 
r·Ulitary activity in December was highlighted 
by an increase' in the number of VC/PAVN attacks on isolated 
outposts, hamlets , and districts, towns , and the avoidance of 
contact with large GVN and Free \~orld Forces . 
The effectiveness 
of this strategy was attested by the higbest monthly friendly 
casualty total of the war , by friendly weapons losses in excess 
of wee.pons captured for the first tillle since July , and by 3CP/o 
fewer VC casualties tban in November . . . 
"January , 1966: 
The Free World peace offensive , coupled with 
TET festivities and the accompanying cease-fire , resulted in a 
period of restricted military activities for both friendly and 
enemy forces . .. Despite this decrease in activity, GVN and Free 
riorld Forces conti nued to force inroads into areas long conceded 
as VC territory ... " it2I 
ffinphas is Adde{f 
This is not the place for a detailed analysis of the r epor1;~ng of 
t he war, or of the implications of the above- cited evaluations . 
But 
several points do seem to emerge : 
L 
The reports are far too optimistic from January through April, 
1965 , and a big switch seems to cone in JW1e , 1965, when 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I)cciassificd per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D;Jle: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
General Westmoreland had already made his 44-battalion 
r equest and warned of disaster if they were not forth-
coming. 
May ' s report begins to show the change in mood,. 
but its ambiguous evaluation is in sharp contrast to the 
brief backward look offered in Sept~~er . 
2. 
Pacification is mentioned in the January evaluation, but 
fades Sitay to virtually nothing in the months of the build-
up. 
3. 
The evaluations do not suggest that the main force threat 
is in ~~y way dininishing by the end of 1965 . 
Indeed, they 
accurately predict l arger battles in 1966 . 
They do not 
suggest, therefore, that the time had come to start em-
phasizing pacification at the expense of exerting ~re 
pressure directly on the enemy . 
The e\"aluations do not 
address this question directly, of course , but they do 
suggest that if any greater emphasis was to be put on 
pacification, it could be done only if there '-las not a 
corresponding reduction in the attack effort against the 
ve . 
This , in turn, would ieply that if pacification was 
to receive greater emphasis at the beginning of 1966, it 
,,'ould require either oore Allied troops or else might 
l ead to a lessening of pressure on the VC . 
35 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
o 
o 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
• 
II. 
Honolulu 
Oeclassified per Executive Order 13526. Scclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Datc: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
A. 
The Conference - February 1966 
The details of the closed meetings at Honolulu do not appear , in 
retrospect , to be nearly as important on the future empbasis on pacifi-
catj.on as the mere fact t bat the public statements of all participants 
carried for;.;ard the theme that had been enunciated i n the Declaration. 
This may often be true of conferences ; it certainly appears true of 
this one, which was convened hastily and took place Hithout any prepara-
tory staff ,;ork on either side of the Pacific . 
In addition, tbe political 
upheavals in the spring of 1966, which follm1ed the conference closely, 
contributed to a reduction in the importance of the details of the con -
f erence as it related to pacifi cation . 
Pacification was discussed frequently during the closed sessions . 
The first t~e caoe during the plenary session, when Ambassador lodge 
delivered his statement to the President. 
Speaking before a large audience which included General Thieu and 
Air Vice J·larshal Ky, Lodge made a general statement about what he called 
lithe subterranean war )" and then discussed the four National Priority 
Areas which the GVN and t he U. S. had established in October 1965: 
III would like to begin by sayillg that the successes and 
the sacrifices of the military, both the Vietnamese and the 
American military , have created a fresh opportunity to win 
the so- called 
I subterranean ,·;ar · .•. 
11 ••• We can beat up North Vietnamese regiments in the high 
plateau for the next tv.'enty years and it will not end the ,,far 
-- unless we and the Vietnamese are able to build simple but 
solid political institutions under v!hich a proper police can 
function and a climate created in which economic and social 
r evolution , in freedom, are possible . 
"The GVN has organized itself to do this job and you \1ill 
hear a presentation by General Thang , 
~ ... ho is in charge . 
The 
American contribution consists of training and equipp:i.ng of 
personnel; advice ; and material . . . 
"Four priority areas have been chosen . 
Three are places 
of gI'~at lx,-Jortance and difficulty . 
The 
~ourth is largely 
pacified and is the place where they want to get the economic 
and social development program going. 
We think the areas are 
well chosen . 
The three tough ones are close to the Vietneoese 
and .~ericen armies '''hich means that the military presence 
helpS pacification . 
And, as pacification gets going, it im-
proves the base for the milital'Y . 
36 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"In the four priority areas are 192 hSJ:1lets , including 
238 ,600 people, to be secured by the end of 1966 . 
But aVl{ 
efforts are not linited to these four priority areas . 
An 
effort is underway ~hich aims to r aise the percentage of the 
whole country which is pacified by about :t.4%; 1. e., from the 
current figure of about 5Z~ to about 66% by the end of the 
year ... " ... Y 
After the statements of Lodge and Hestmoreland (who discussed only 
military matters) , the President said: 
"I hope that out of this conference '\ve "<ill return wi th 
clear views in our O1m minds as to hOH we can apply more mili-
tary pressure and do it better , how we can build democracy in 
Vietnam and ;,rhat steps must be taken to do it better, how we 
can search for peace in the world, honorable and just peace , 
and do it better . 
Tllf we can do the first , namely , develop better methods 
for defeating the Viet Cong and better methods for developing 
a democracy , I have no doubt but that the third will be much 
easier to do because you can bargain much better from strength 
than you can from weakness . II 1./ 
·X· On Harch 4, 1966, Lodge transmitted the text and charts of this brief-
ing to Secretary Ncllamara a.nd apparently at the sal'lle time to t he \-Ihite 
House , at the request of Jack Valenti. 
Ledge wrote: 
UDear Bob: 
"At the request of Jack Valenti, I have put together a 
book containing the text and maps used in my presentation at 
the Honolulu Conference . It is intended to serve as a current 
indicator of paci£ication progress being made within the 1966 
National Priority Areas ... 
"I think I should call attention to the fact that for Ameri-
cans , it is natural to set goals and then work to achieve them 
by a specific date . 
"ThiS , however , is not the traditional Vietna:cese way . 
\'lhile they have set a goal of 190 hamlets in the four priority 
areas , my g\less '\'lOuld be that by the end tlf 1.966, they may 
have achieved somewhat more then this , but not necessarily the 
ones which are listed here. 
In fact , if they r an i nto unexpectedly 
beavy opposition in one place and find a particular}y good and 
unexpected opportunity else;.;here , they probably ought to chance 
the plan . .. II gj 
37 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 II 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
After a short recess, Secretary Rusk then discussed the reasons 
why Hanoi \tas not yet ready to negotiate, and said that if the GVN 
built lithe kind of society uhich is indestructible , " then Hanoi would 
probably come to the conference table more rapidly . 
"Anything that 
ean move faster r ather than more slm-rly on our side a.rld your side , II 
he said, " anything that can cause then to realize that an epidenic 
of confidence is building in the South and that momentum is gathering 
could hasten the time when Hanoi will decide to stop this aggression .lI}jj 
The President then said: 
"I hope that every person here !'rom the 
U. S. side will bear in mind that before I take that plane back, I w~~t 
to have the best suggestion obtainable as to hO'" 'Ne can bring better 
military pressure on Hanoi and frOIl the pacification side how ,.,e can 
bring a better program to the people of South Vietnac, and finally , 
third, what other efforts we can make to secure a just and honorable 
peace . 
Nov, I vant to have my little briefcase filled with those three 
targets -- a better military program, a better pacification program 
that includes everything, and a better peace program. II 2/ 
General Theng then presented the GV1~
' s paci:fication plans , in a 
briefing later made public. 
Thsllg said: 
liThe objective of the l{hole people of my country is a 
unified de~ocratic and strong Vietnam . .. To reach this ob-
j ective , our national Leadership Conunittee has promoted 
three main policies: first, nilitary offenses ; second, 
rural pacification; and third, democracy . 
" ... But it' is necessary, i,lr . President, to define what 
this means by pacification . 
In my opinion, that is a failure 
of the past government , not to define exactly what "re mean by 
pacification . . . 
III think that it is necessary to • . . define pacification 
as an effort to restore the public security first, and carry-
ing out a government policy "\.;bich aims at improving the stan-
dard of living in this area in every respect - - political, 
economic, social. 
" .. . the prerequisite is security .. • So our concept of paci-
fication is based on four main points : 
Point No. l : 
The rural pacification operation can only 
ioplement through the real solidarity among the people, 
the arDed force~, and the administr ation ... 
Point No . 2 : 
Our govertJI:lent should be very clear y,hen 
it says that it y:ould like to build a new society for a 
better life in rural areas . 
That is meaningless to the 
peasant ii' you don ' t develop t~at in a concrete package . 
TOP SECRET - SensitiVe 
I 
I 
Dcclassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
[At this point, Thang launched into a lengthy explana-
tion of '''hat he meant by a neH society. 
In a vague 
discussion, he described the social, economic, and 
political attributes of the nell societ~ , all of v;hich 
were general and idealized stateme~ts~ 
Point No . 3 : 
Tb:e clear and realistic policy of the govern-
ment contributing to a better life in a De,. society I just 
mentioned should be widely knmm among the population end 
the cadres .•. 
Point no . 4: 
Rural pacification operations will open 
lasting peece if the cnerty infrastructure is destroyed 
and permanently follo ...... ed up, our Clm infrastructure created 
and supported by the people ... All provinces have promised 
to the goverrunent that 75 percent of the follmdng fac ts 
maybe can be accomplished by the 1st of January 1967 : 
"Pacification of' 963 new hBlllets; pacification of 1,083 
existing hamlets; building of 2251 classrooms ; 913 kilometers 
of roads ; 128 bridges ; 57 darns ; and 119 kilo~eters of CWlalS 
... vihile ,~e have selected four areas of priority , the pacifi-
cation operation has been pus bed fOl'ward as usual , but .... 1itb 
less efforts . . . 
"Rural pac ification will be a long- tem operation. 
We 
have modest and practical, rather than spectacular , goals for 
1966· ··" Y 
After General Thang ' s remarks, the plenary sessi on records show 
repeated references to the pacification effort , although there is con-
fusion as to ,".'hat it means . 
General Thieu nmde additional summary 
r emarks on pacification, then l·rinister Ton gave a brief'ing on the econo-
mic situation, follm-;ed by David Bell on the Sru:1e subject . 
The next day , February 8 , the working groups presented their findings 
to the President . 
First , Secretary Rusk and Foreign ?-1inister Do discussed 
the s ession on negotiations . 
Then General Thang and Secretary Freeman 
r eported on their session on rural construction. 
The details of the 
working groups session itself are covered beloiv, but in plenary . 
Thang 
emphasized the follo;·;ing points : 
Our future should be develo~ed mainly in four priority 
area.s .. . i{a.'ldicr9.ft should b.-: int:oducci and developed 
i n those areas alsc ... Rural electrification should be 
developed and the nutiber of ga~crators L~creased in 
1967 ... 
39 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 II 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Land r eform efforts should be pushed forward ... 
We ask that construction material and cement be sent to 
Vietnam as soon as possible so our school programs can 
be developed . .. 
The training o~ officials at hamlet and village levels 
is vitaL . . 1/ 
Secretary Free~an, who was about to make his first trip to Vietnam, 
summarized for the Americans: 
IIHaville; spent a good deal of time yesterday listening to 
the very eloquent presentations by the Chairman and the Prillle 
Ninister, as veIl as by 1-1inister Ton, this is pretty much what 
we ,.,.ould call a nuts and bolts discussion session. 
"One thing that "Vas decided for United States purposes , for 
purposes of phraseology, was that the ,,'ord 'pacification ' really 
did not have the right tone . 
The term ' social construction' 
might better be used . .. 
"There was sone discussion, considerable , about the selection 
of province chiefs . 
It irlas strongly emphasized that it was im-
portant that the men be of integrity and ability, end that they 
be selected and maintained and bucked up . 
liThe Prime Minister, General Thieu, and then General Thnng 
both said that you [General. Thie~ "ere personally interested in 
this, and that· you were going to select them shortly, that they 
would have a duration of at least a year , but would be carefully 
r eviC\"!ed and .... iould be changed if they didn't do the job, but 
wouldn ' t be changed for other reasons, which .... :e thought ·Has ex-
tremely important and we were gratified to find it out . 
"You also explained to us , your associ ates General Ky and 
General Thang, the change of co~and, saying in the past they 
... -rere confused, a.."'1d that they were no" clear , so that everyone 
k ... le .... ' exactly what their function Hould be . 
"Then you discussed the training of the cadre .. . 
III want to revic\l the REA question and find out a bit more 
about why that seemed to have sane l ag . 
ItFinally, we discussed the possibility of a joint training 
progr:m :for the village and hamlet chiefs who presumably vould 
be elected, but that some background in the philosophy, purpose 
end aims of governr.::cnt, and the techniques of governing and ad-
ministration, ·Here felt to be needed by those people . y 
40 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633[6. By: NWD Date: 20[ 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
The President then responded to the remarks of' Thang end Freeman by urg-
ing "all of you connected vlith our program .. . to give very special atten- . 
tion to refugee camps and the schools in the refugee camps . H 21 
He then 
turned to Ninister Ton and David Bell for a discussion of the economic 
situation . 
Then Secretary Gardner , \-!ho had co-chaired a working group 
on health and education -- the distinction bet"leen rural construction and 
the health/education programs was not clarified -- made his remarks . 
He 
set out perhaps the most clearly-defined objectives of the session (except 
f or the economic negotiations) , describing the new contract with the /IJ·fA 
for training persormel, the nev·r goal for provincial medical teams , and the 
plans for a ne\-l medical logistics system. 
In large part his goals were 
more specific than those of the other ' iorking group because the USAID 
Public Health Chief in Saigon, Major General James Humphries , had already 
laid groundvrork for an excellent program of health services and assistance , 
and Gardner 'Has able to ,·rork from a specific plan. 
Gardner went on to discuss education , "there bis goals and objectives 
were less clear, and the President asked several detailed questions , con-
cluding by asking General Ky to ask the PJnbassador to request an educa-
tional team to go to Saigon aft er the agricultural team headed by Secretary 
Freeman returned . 
The Vietnamese then thanked the ftmcricans for the conference , and in 
turn some of the senior members of the American delegation -- in order , 
Admiral Sharp: Leonard r'larks, General \Oiheeler , Ambassador L.od.ge , Ambassa-
dor Herriman -- made brief statements about the meaning of the conference. 
The President then made his final statement: 
II . .. Preserve this communique, because it is one vre don It 
.... ra'1t to forget : It will be a kind of bible that "re are going 
to follo':/ . 
Hhen He come back here 90 days from nmt, or six 
months from novr, we are going to start out and rnoke reference 
to the announcements that the President, the Chief of State and 
the Prime 1·1inister made in paragraph 1 , and what the leaders 
and advisors revieVled in paragraph 2 . . . You men who are respon-
sible for these departments, you ministers , and the staffs 
associated "rith them in both governments , bear in mind 'ole are 
going to give you an examination and the finals \.ill be on just 
· ... ,hat you have done . 
"In paragraph 5; how have you built democracy in the rural 
areas? 
How I'lUch of it have you built , vThen and where? 
Give us 
dates , times , nu.rnbers. 
Ifrn par.s.graph 2; larger outputs , more efficient production 
to improve credit , handicraft , light industry, rural electri-
fication - - are those just phrases , high-sounding "lords , or have 
you coonskins on the ,,·all ... 
lUP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"IText is health and education, Hr. Gardner. 
He don ' t want 
to talk about it; we want to do something about it . 
' The 
President pledges he will dispatch teams of experts . r 
Well, .. re 
better do something besides dispatching. 
They should get out 
there . 
We 
~xe going to train health personnel . 
How many? 
You 
don ' t want to be like the fellOtY' "Tho was playing poker and when 
he made a big bet they called him and said 'what have you got? ' 
He said, ' aces ' and they asked ' how many ' and he said ' one 
aces ' ... 
"Next is refugees . 
That is just as hot as a pistol i n my 
country. 
You don ' t want me to raise a white flag and surrender 
so we have to do something about that . . . 
"Growing military effectiveness : 
we have not gone in because 
we don ' t want to overshadm .... this meeting here with bombs , \dth 
mortars , .. lith hand grenades , with ' Masher ' movements . 
I don ' t 
knO'1l .. rho na.n:cs your operations, but ' :·1asher.' I get kind of 
mashed myself . 
But we haven ' t gone into the details of growing 
military cffecti veness for two or three reasons . 
One, "'e want 
to be able to honestly and truthfully say that this has not been 
a military build- up conference of the world here in Honolulu. 
We have been talking about building a society following the out-
lines of the Prime !.unister ' s speech yesterday. 
"Second, this is not the place, with 100 people sitti ng 
around, to build a military effectiveness . 
"Third, I . want to put it off as long as I can, having to 
make these crucial decisions . 
I enjoy this agony ... r don 't 
"rant to comc out of this meeting that ,·re have come up here and 
added on X divisions and Y battalions or Z regiments or D 
dollars , because one good story about how many billions are 
going to be spent can bring us more inflation that ,,,e are 
talking about in Vietnam. 
\~e want to .. ,ork those out in the 
quietness of the Cabinet Room after you have made your recom-
mendations , General Wheeler.Lr Admiral Sharp, \Jhen you come to 
us ... Itlcl 
LEmphasis Adde!y 
The President ' s remarks candidly indicated the type of pressure and 
the expectations that he had for the effort. 
But beyond ~he high-level interest so clearly demonstrated publicly 
for the first tir-:e at Honolulu, what was accomrl.ished? 
As ment ioned 
earlier, Honolulu ' s importance lay i n t~~ things : (1) the public support 
shown for the "other war" ; end (2) the sections of the Declaration which 
cor:ritted the Gyri to the electoral process . 
If nothing e.lse .. ras accom-
plished at Honolulu, that r.~de the conference worthwhile . 
Thus, i t is 
per}le.ps petty to criticize the details of the conference . 
But they do 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 II 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
suggest an unfortunate ~ailure to co~e to grips with a~y of the basic 
issues concerning pacirication, and, moreover, a skillful performance 
by the GVH to please their American hosts . 
Thang ' s statement to the 
President after the working session, for example , with its emphasis on 
rural electrific£"tlon, handicrafts , and the nee-d for "materials and 
cement" -- none of which were major GVN concerns at that time -- can 
best be explained, in retrospect , by the Vietnamese desire to emphasize 
those ~hiDgS they felt the Secretary of Agriculture , the co-chairman of 
t he' American .... :orking group , was most interested in . 
Although the inner workings of the conference do not seem to have 
had much importance on the development of the pacificat ion e£fort, a 
r ecord does remain of the "rural construction vlorking group, n and it 
deserves a brief summary. 
The meeting is useful to examine not because 
of its ultimate importance, • .,hich Has marginal , but because it provides 
us with a r ecord of a type of discussion between Americans and Vietnamese 
which has been r eplayed constantly since (and before) . 
To some weary 
participants , the very words used have seemed to be unchanged since 1962. 
A summary ca~ot, unfortunately, recapture the flavor of confusion 
which surrounds the memorandum for the record (A- 2254 , February 15, 1966) . 
The meeting began with a discussion of terminology (see footnote on 
'Jr evolutionary developmentn) in which it "'as decided to use the phrase 
"social construction" in place of pacification in English . 
Then , accord-
ing to the memorandum, everyone lapsed back into using the phrase 
"pacification. n 
The Ameri can representatives then pressed the issue of the role of 
the province chief, ioplying strongly that they thought the province 
chiefs should have mor e power and autonomy. 
The Vietnamese , led by 
General Co, neatly ans,'rered this issue , "referring to t he establishment 
of Rural Construction Councils and Division and Corps levels, "There such 
matters as the disposition and use of military forces are arbitrated and 
decided upon . " 
When Leonard Unger , asked if the military commanders '\oiould 
be committed to providing the necessary military forces for the pacifica-
tion effort , JlGeneral. Co again responded, saying that in the past senior 
commanders tended to pull troops a~.zay from Provincial control for search 
end destroy operations . 
This is a natm'al desire on the part of these 
commanders who tend to feel that this is a ~ore L~ortant role for such 
troops . 
Now, hm-;ever, their missions have changed. 
These seni or cormnan-
ders are nov directly involved in the pacification program, are members 
of the respective Rural Construction Councils .•. In other words , things 
have changed for the better . 
Ambassador Unger continued to pursue his 
point , 
stressL~g our concern that vestiges of the past may still remain. 
General Thang re- entered the discussion, explaD1ing that the GVN nmT has 
a nel'T chain of con:roc.nd, clear and clean from Saigon to the Corps to the 
Division to the Province to the District; there is only one channel in 
the country end it is a military channel .~. Still on the same subject, 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Dcclassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1.1r . Poats raised the question: 
~'ihat is the prir.Lary nission of the Division 
Commander? 
Is it pacif'ication? General Thang e:nSl.,ered in the af'f'irmative . n 
The discussion continued along thes e lines , and the airgram candidly 
conc~udes
: 
I!Genera~s Co and Tha.'1g were being I-ressed by rather pointed 
questions at this juncture and seemed to be trying to indicate that 
pacif'ication is a primary task, a~though other military tasks must continue 
to be perforrled . 
It "ras fairly apporent that troops charged with securing 
the pacification area are liable still to be irithdrawn on a temporary basi s 
to meet situations which ARVN senior cor.:rn..enders judge to be critical ." 
The meeting then di~cussed the cadre progrtD ; the renewed emphasis on 
village government ; the role of the province chief (at this point General 
Co made his statement that the GVN would appoint province chiefs for one 
year minimum period, a decision 'tihich i,Tas never carried out) ; the intro-
ductton of troops; the cadre ( again); the six areas where the effort needed 
improven.ent (agriculture, handicrai't, land rerorm, rural electrirication, 
construction materials, and training of local officials); land rerorro 
(-\>Tith Minister Tri presenting his rour-month oli plan again , and Poats 
expressing I1concern about the performance to date") ; and the general ques -
tion of pacification goals . 
luld then , arter reporting back to the President in the meeting de-
scribed earlier, the participants bro}:e up, returning to Saigon and 
v/ashington to give lithe other war ll a nevi emphasis ; to reorganize the 1-Iis-
sion in Saigon; to appoint a ne:: Special AssistAnt to the President in 
Washington; to start the quest £or coon ~kins (the phrase was in common use 
in Saigon within a rev days); to a\'iait the public and press reaction (see 
follovting section) ; and to wal.k liithout \·:arning into a major political 
crisis which alJ::iost brought the governnent do"m , set back every time -
schedule m'lde at Honolulu, forced a postponement of the next scheduled 
conference from June-July until October, and - - through an ironic t\·Tist 
of f'ate - - left the GVN stronger than bef'ore, follo~fing a remarkably 
successful election . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
I 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order [3526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 [6. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B. 
Impact on Public in US, on US Mission in Vietna~ , and on Vietnamese 
"This ;.reek the word ' pacification ' was on everyone ' s lips at" t he 
Honolulu conferel ce on Vietnem," .rrote Charles l·!ohr in the New York 
Times, February 13, 1966, "e..'1d Ina.'1y important members of the Jolmson 
AdmInistration embraced the idea with all the enthusiasm of a horse 
pl~er with a new betting system . 
The main purpose of the Honolulu 
conference was to dramatize this American enthusiasm for the 1966 
rural pacification - -
somet~es called ' rural construction' -- program 
of the Government of South Vietnam and to pledge more American 
assistance for the program . " 
J4ohr ' s article may have been slightly exaggerated, but there can 
be little doubt that the President I s pledge on behalf of the U. S . 
Government to the pacification effort began a new period for the U, S. 
Government in Vietnam. 
From Honolulu on it was open and unmistakable 
U.S. policy to support pacification a..,d the "ot~er war,1I and those who 
Sati these acti vi ties as unimportant or secondary had to submerge their 
sentiments under a cloud of rhetoric , 
Despite this fact, of course, 
many heated discussions still lay ahead of the I·lission on program 
after program, and many major battles remained to be fought . 
Porter 
and Komer would fight them, as .dll be shown later , 
This was the great impact of Honolulu -- on pacification . 
But 
there were other ramifications of the Honolulu confer ence which ovel'-
shadowed the emphasis on non -military activities in the months that 
follQ'.ied . 
Because of these events - - particularly the politi cal up-
heavals that rocked Vietnam from March until June -- the follow-up 
conference tentati vely planned for June did not take place, and the 
growth in pacification ' s importance .ras probably set back about six 
months . 
'·fhi1e this study does not try to cover the concurrent events 
of the period, it should be emphasized that the most important parts 
of the Honolulu Declaration ifere not those dealing with pacification at 
all, but rather the sections which committed the GVN to "fornmlate a 
democratic constitution to the people for discussion and modification ; 
to seek i ts ratification by secret ballot ; to create, on the basis of 
elections rooted in that constitution, an elected government . , . It 11/ 
\-lith these 'Hords, the GVN was openly COmmitted, under U.S , pressure, to 
a process .Thich they probably did not desire or appreciate , 
In the 
months that follOiied, the words of the Honolulu Declaration were used 
against General ICy by his Buddhist Struggle r.lovement opponents, to 
hoist him on his Honolulu petard; but then , in a remarkable about-
face, Ky EimultEneollsly cracked down on the ~\ddhists a~d held success-
ful elections for a Constitutional Ass~nbly (September 11, 1966) . 
The following collection of newspaper i tems is selected to show 
t hat there Here differing opinions within the U.S, Mission a11d among 
Vietnamese, but that in general the message fro:n HQnolulu did get 
through to the Mission , 
Since almost every re'Porter in Saigon had 
sources "rithin some element of the Mission who uere telling him their 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Execulive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Projecl Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
honest f eelings (the Saigon Nission, i t was once said by Barry Zorthian, 
could not keep a secret 24 hours) , the stories from Saigon do reflect 
what the tUssion thought in the days just af'ter Honolulu . 
The editori-
als and coltunnists from Hashington indicate to what degree the Adminis-
tration succeeded in convincing the press corps (which is not, of 
course, the U.S. public) that the emphasis at Honolulu was really on 
pacification . 
EDI TORIAL : 
The new York Herald Tribune, February 8: 
"'!'he meeting presents the prospect of our resuming the 
war in more favorable circumstances . 
The meeting of the 
heads of the American and South Vietnamese governments is 
a fresh and stronger demonstration of mutual confidence. 
On this basis they can no',-' proceed to mount measures for 
dealing with the equally important military end civilian 
aspects of the war . 
"The two are intimat~ly related, , . the loyalty and sup-
port of the peasants in the interior are essential . Presi-
dent Johnson is bidding for them by offering some of the 
benefits of his Great SOCiety progra1!l to the South Vietnamese . 
It will not be easy, in time of war, . .. but .. . they must be 
pursued with the same vigor as we press the war on the 
battlefield. " 
EDITORIAL: 
The Hashington Evening Star, February 7 : 
"It is particularly significant that the American 
delegation included FIEH Secretary Gardner and Orville 
Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture . 
Their presence cer -
tainly me~~s that a greater 'pacification ' effort will be 
made as the fighting goes on . . . " 
COL1.mNIST : Marquis Childs, February 9 (from Honolulu) 
"This conference called by President Johnson is a 
large blue chip put on the survival value of the ~~ry, 
exuberant Air Vice Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky, and the generals 
who rule with him. It is expected that Ky will not only 
survive but that with massive economic help from the U. S, 
the national leadership committee will eventually win the 
support of' the peasant in the countryside ... Any sensible 
bookmaker would quote long odds against the bet paying off , 
But after 50 many false starts this seems to be the right 
direction - - a determined drive to r aise the level of living 
in the countryside a'1d c'lose the gap of indifference and 
hostility between the peasa'1t and the sophisticated city 
dweller . . . OVer and over '.:e have been told that 'only by 
winning the he~rts and minds of' the Vietnamese people .nll 
46 
TOP SEC~~ - Sensitive 
Dcclassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
we achieve a victory that has meaning beyond the grim choice of 
pulverization o~ American occupation into the indefinite future 
... This is the reason teams of American specialists in agri -
culture, heelth, and education are goi ng to Vietnam ... tI 
EDITORIAL : 
The New York Herald Tri bune , February 9 : 
"Perhaps the most constructive part of the Honolulu 
conference .ras the emphasis it placed on this hitherto 
badly neglected aspect of the Viet Na~ war !pacification7. 
It is unfortunate that Chief of State Thieu-diverted attention 
from it by heaping more fuel on the controversy over .... 1hether 
t he Viet Cong should or should not sit at a peace conference 
table ... n 
EDITORIAL : The new York Times, February 9 end 13 : 
"The Honolulu coni'erence has f'ollo ...... ed the classic pattern 
of Summit meetings that are hastily called without thorough 
preparation in advance ; it has left confusion in its wake, 
with more questions raised than ans'.vered ... The one important 
area of ~~rcement at Honolulu, apart from continuation of 
the military efforts, was on an expanded program of' ' rural 
construction. ' 
The prospective doubling of American economic 
aid, however, will be futile unless it is accompanied by a 
veritable social revolution, including vigorous land reform. 
Premier Ky cast some doubt in his emphasis on moving slowly. 
His Minister of Rural Pacification enVisages action in only 
1,900 of South Vietnwn ' s 15,000 hamlets this year . 
"Vice President Humphrey evidently has his work cut out 
for him in his follmr-up visit to Saigon. Unless some way 
can be found to give more momentum to this effort, the new 
economic aid program may go down the same drain as all previous 
programs of this kind. 
"It would be a cruel deception for Americans to get the 
idea that social reforms carried out by the Ky government 
with knerican money are going to ~~e any perceptible difference 
in the near future to the Vietnamese people or to the course 
of the war. " 
COLUMIITST : Ted Lewis, New York Daily News, February 10 (from 
Hashington) : 
"\'lhy, all of a sudden, has President Johnson beF to 
come to grips with the tother war ' in South Vietnam? .. 
Johnson, uith his typic".l oratorical f'lourishes, has given 
the impres~ion that he launched something totally ne...., at 
47 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
J 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 II 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Honolulu . . ,The fact is that for several years this problem of 
the 'other war' has been recognized as vital by the State 
Department I the Pentagon and even by the lfuite House . 
But 
nobody did rruch about it 1 except in an offhand wy . . . 
"Johnson 1s a master of timing . 
He has definitely gained 
a political advantage over his Viet policy critics 2Y stressing 
right now the need of' winning over the peasants . .. /Senator 
Rober!7 Kennedy complained in a Senate speech just-ten days ago 
that there were 'many indications that we have not yet even begun 
to develop a program . . . lt is absolutely urgent, I the Senator said, 
' that we now act to institute new programs of education, land 
refonn, public health, political participation ... !. II 
NEt1S ANALYSIS : 
Richard Cri tchi'ield in The Hashington Evening 
Star, February 9 (from Saigon) : 
IIpresident Johnson I s historic decision at Honolulu back -
ing an knerican-sponsored brand of social revolution as an 
alternative to communism in South Vietnam was warmly hailed 
today by veteran political observers. 
The Honolulu declara-
tion was viewed as ending posh,ar era of American foreign 
policy auned at stabilizing the status quo in Asia . 
"The key phrase, in the vie'" of many diplomats here, wes 
the o~er of full American 'support to measures of social 
revolution, including land reform based upon the principle 
of building upvard from the hopes and purposes of all the 
people of Vietnam. 
II . .. Johnson I s deCisions to put political remedies on a par 
with military action are also regarded here as a major personal 
triumph for Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge and his top aide , 
NaJor General Edt-Tard G. Lansdale, the two main advocates of 
Isocial revolution ' in South Vietnam . . . The Honolulu declara-
tion appears to signify a major shift aw~ from the policy of 
primarily military support established by President Kennedy in 
1961 and closely identified with General Maxwell TSlflor, 
Defense SecretaT'J McNemara, alld Secretary of State Rusk ... The 
Lodge -Le.nsdale formula \o.'as a striking departure. in that it saw 
the eventual solution not so much in Hanoi ' s capitUlation as 
in successful pacification in South Vietnam . . . The Honolulu 
decla~ation amounts to almost a point by ~oint acceptance 
of' this f'ormula and both its phraseology and philosophy bear 
Lansdale's unmistakable imprint . . . " 
EDlTORI.AL : 
The ~timore Sun, February 10 : 
"Unless there ,re.s more substance to the Honolulu Conference 
than meets the eye, it could be suremed up as much ado -- not 
48 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
, 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
much ado about nothing but simply much ado . .. It was all 
spectacular and diverting but so far as we can see the 
problem of the war is where it was before the burst of 
acti vi ty began ... It is probably worthwhiJ e to have a 
reiteration of the social and economic measures needed in 
South Vietnam ... It is essential to underscore the political 
nature of the war, along with the continuing military opera-
tions . 
But these matters were generally understood before 
the Honolulu meetings . 
Perhaps events to come will make the 
purpose of the meeting clearer . II 
EDITORIAL : 
The Ne .. r York Post, February 9 : 
"The Hawaii meetings were advertised as the beginning 
of a vast new movement of economic and social reform in 
Vietnam, President Johnson, we were told, .. lent to Honolulu 
to launch the ne'·' approach with maximum drama. 
"Instead, the session inadvertently underscored the 
lack of interest of the junta in Saigon in anything but 
military conquest of the Viet Cong, to be carried out by 
stepped up U. S . anned efforts . , . n 
NE\·lS STORY: 
P;P , February 10 (from Honolulu) : 
"Vice President Humphrey left for Saigon today with 
South Vietnam's top leaders to spur action on programs 
attacking hunger, disease, and ignorance in that war-torn 
country ... II 
lID-IS ANALYSIS : 
Charles 140hrj 
The lIew York Times, February 10 
(from Saigon : 
I1In the atmosphere of' Honolulu, there was much emphasis 
on form, so much that in some w8¥s it m8¥ have obscured 
substance . 
The A~ericans appeared so delighted with 
~~shal Ky ' s ' style ' -- .. dth his showing as a politically 
salable young man with the right instincts rather than as 
a young warlord - - that there seemed to be almost no 
emphasis on the important differences between ~he Govern-
ments .. . "'"'hat fifarshal Ky told President Jolmson was something 
he had often said before : 
South Vietnamese society is still 
riddled .. ~th social injustices and political weaknesses j 
there is not one political party worthy of the neme .. . The 
South Vietnamese leaders believe that they could not survive 
a ' peaceful settlement' that le£t the VC political structure 
in place , even if the VC guerrilla units were disbanded. 
Therefore, the South Vietnamese feel that ' rural pacifica-
tion, I of "\-Thich much was said at Honolulu, is necessary not 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Dcclassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Dale: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
only to help them achieve military victory but also to prevent 
a politi cal reversal of that v1ctory .. . As t he Vietnamese see 
pacification, its core is not merely ' helping the people to.a 
better life,' the aspect on which many American speakers 
dwelled, it is rather the destruction of the cl andestine VC 
political structure and the creation of an i r onlike system 
of government poli tical control over the population .. . 
"But the two governments have never been cl oser than 
they are 1n the aftermath of Honolulu, and the atmosphere 
of good feeling seems genuine . .. " 
NEI·1S ANALYSIS : 
Roscoe Drunnnond, February 14 (from Hashington ) : 
" .. . The decisions taken at Honolulu by Presi dent 
Jobnson and Premier Ky go to the heart of winning. 
They 
.. !ere primarily social, economiC , and political deCisions . 
They come at a malleable end perhaps decisive turn in the 
war .. . n 
NE\-lS ANALySIS : 
Tom Hicker in The Heti York Times, February 13 
(from Saigon) : 
IIVice President Humphrey . . . has left Saigon reverber-
ating with what he said was the ' single message ' he had 
came to deliver. 
The message ~ras that the ... rar in Vietnam 
was a wer to bring social justice and economic and political 
progress to the Vietnan:ese people . . . Humphrey said at a 
news conference here : 
' Social and economic revolution 
does not belong to the VC. 
Non-commwli st forces are the 
ones forwarding the revolution.' 
"The emphasis on social reform could also quiet 
critics who contend that \'lashington has concentrated too 
much on the military problem and not enough on civic 
act ion to win the loyalty of the Vietnamese people . . . tt 
NEt'IS AlIIlLYSIS : 
Charles t-10hrj 
The 
(from Saigon : 
Ne';I York Times , February 13 
"By giving enormous emphasis and publicity t o it, 
an impression Has left that pacification is something new. 
I n a sense, there was some truth in this , 
The men run-
ning the program, both Vietnamese e:.nd Am{ r i can, are new. 
And the 1966 plan itself is a new one i n many respects . 
"Pacification is vitally important to success in the 
guerrilla war in South Vietnam. 
Hithout it, purely mi litary 
success becomes empty even if' all the battles -are 'won '." 
50 
TOP SECRET - Sensi tive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
NIDiS ANALYSIS : 30seph Alsop, February 14 (from Saigon) : 
"CARl' BEFORE HORSE . .. All that really mattered at Honolu:lu 
was a Presidential decision to provide the forces needed to 
keep the pressure on the enemy here in Vi~tnam. The odds 
are heavy that the President, who seems to prefer doing good 
by stealth, actually took this decision behind the electorate 
smokescreen o£ talk about other matters . 
The question 
remains whether the needed forces will be provided soon 
enough . 
One must wait and see , 
"But at the risk of sOWlding captious, and for the 
6a~e of honesty ~qd realism, it must be noted t~~t there 
was a big l'o1e.dison Avenue element in all the talk about 
'pacification ' during the Hawaii meeting and Vice President 
Humphrey ' s subsequent visit to Vietnem. 
"This does not mean that pacification of the Vietnex1ese 
countryside is an unimportant and/or secondary problem , 
On 
the contrary, it will eventually be all-ilrrportant and primary. 
But one need only glance at the list of priorHy areas 
marked for pacification now, to see the aruruan's touch in the 
present commotion , 
"There ere : 
/In Giang Province, which belongs to the 
Hoa Hac sect and has been long since pacified by the lioa 
Hao; the Hop Tac region near Saigon, where General Harkins 
experimented unhappily with the so-called oil spot technique ; 
parts o£ Binh Dinh Province along the north-south highw~ ; 
and the fringes of the Marine enclave at Da Nang . 
"Each area differs from the others . 
In the case of the 
nine villages on the fringes of the Marines ' Da Nang enClave, 
£or instance, pacification is needed to insure airfield 
security from mortar fire . 
Most of these villages have been 
Viet Cong strongholds for over 20 years, and they could be 
dangerous. 
II ••• Pacification by the Marines looks very fine ... But 
it takes far too many Narines to do the job . 
"Nonetheless, the real objections to ma"ldng a big-
inun.ediate shoil of pacification are quite different . 
The 
Hop Tac e::q::.=rience tells the story. 
HerE a great effort 
was made by the Vietn~ese authorities with the strong 
support of General Harktns , 
A good deal lIas initially 
accomplished, 
Boasts began to be beard. 
Hhereat the 
enemy sailed forth from 1.he nearest redoubt area, knocked 
do\m everything that had been built up, murdered all t.lte 
51 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Dcclassilicd per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projecl Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Dale: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
villagers who had worked with t he government, and le~t things 
much worse then they had been be~ore ... An attempt to make a 
big immediate show o~ paci~ication needs to be warned against, 
because o~ the \fashington pressure to do just that . 
A large 
element o~ the U.S. Mission was called home a month or so 
ago . 
And i n e~~ect J these men were commanded to produce a 
plan ~or making a ShOll as soon as possible . 
lIFortunately, they had the courage to point out that 
t he cart was being put before the horse once again . 
For-
ttlllately, Ambassador Lodge is well aware of the dangers o~ 
putting the cart be~ore the horse . 
The pressure ~or some -
thi ng showy may continue, but it is likely to be resisted . 
nI~ so, the pressure will not be altogether useless . 
The Vietnamese and the Americans here are getting ready 
for pacification on a big scale and in an im~inative It'a::/, 
part~ because o~ that pressure . 
"It is vital to have everything in readiness to do the 
job of pacification as soon as ~avoraole circumstances 
arise . 
But it is also vital to bear in mind that really 
favorable circumstances cannot arise until the enemy ' s 
backbone of regular units i s at last very close to the 
breaking point, if not actually beginning to break." 
EDITORIAL : 
Christian Science r·lon1 tor, February 11: 
1111' Saigon and Hashington fight South Vietnam' s economic 
and social war as vigorously as they fight its military war, 
t he Conununist thrust against that country will fail. 
Yet 
t his is the biggest 'if ' of the war . 
Over and over l i p-
service has been paid to the inescapable need of winning 
over the peasantry . 
But t ime and again thi s has come to 
naught . 
"We are cautiously encouraged by the latest steps 
being ta.1<;en . 
The strong emphasis laid in the Honolulu 
Declarati on on civic reforms 1s a commitment in the right 
direction . 
The sending of Vice -President Humphrey t o stu~ 
South Vietnamese refonm programs on the spot is an even 
stronger earnest of America' s intention not to let this 
program sljp back into another do -nothinr. doldrum .. . " 
52 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
o 
o 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DMc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET -
Sens! ti ve 
III. 
Honolulu to ,:anila 
A. 
Saigon : 
Porter in Charge 
"Question. 
Mr . President , when you were in Los Angeles reporting 
on the Honolulu Conference, you listed eleven itens vlhich you 
said were discussed, and you said that in all these fields you 
set targets , concrete targets . Would i t be possible to get a list 
of t hese concrete t argets? 
"Ansvler . 
I don ' t have any . 
I think 'That I had in mind there was 
saying that "'e hoped to make certain progress in certain fields and 
,,:e expect to have another conference af'ter a reasonable length of 
time, i n which 'lie will take the hits, runs, and errors "and see what 
we have achieved and everybody would be nnsllcrable , so to speak, as 
to tbe progress they have made and whether or not they are nearing 
their coals ... 1 hope to be in Honolulu in the next few months , 
maybe in the middle of the year , s.nd see what has been done . 
1 
t hought i t '/ias good that we could go there and have the Government 
and the military leader , General Hestmoreland, and the Ambassador 
SJld the Deputy Ambassador , meet with the Vice President , the 
Secretal~ of Agriculture ~~d technicians , and try to expose to the 
,,'orld for three days 'what this country is trying to do to feed the 
hungry , and educate the people, and to impro'fe the life span for 
people who just live to be 35 now . . • A lot of our folks think it i s 
just a military effort . 
We don ' t thin-'\.;: it should be that, and we 
don ' t want it to be that . ,. 11 1:1 
As the Presider~t returned to Hnshington from Honolulu, the Vice 
President, Secretary Freem'lll , and M.::George Bundy headed up a large list 
of high- ranking officials that .rent on to Saigon . 
Bundy, about to leave 
the government, carried with hiD authority fl'om the President to give 
t he Deputy AI:l.bassn.dor "tide authority over all aspects of the rural con-
struction progrElll. 
On February 12, 1966, the President sent Ambassador 
Lodee a IiODIS telegrm:l., ,,:hich was designed to pave the way for Bundy' s 
reorganization effort: 
"Q.UCY£E . 
I 
hop~ that you share my own satisfaction 'With the 
Honolulu Confel'cnce . 
The opportunity to talk face to face with 
you, General HestI10relund end tbe Vietnamese leaders has given 
me a much better appreciation of the problems each of you face , 
but perhaps even more importantly the opportunities open to us . 
1 \fC'.S particUlarly inpressed with the apparent determina.tion of 
'l'hieu, Ky and the other Vietnamese f.linistcrs to carry forward a 
social policy of radical and constructive change . 
However , I 
full ,,'ell realize the treo.~ndous job that they and we ha'fe in 
putting this into practice . 
I intend to see that our organiza-
tion bac..'-'. here for sUPFortine this is proo.ptly tightened and 
53 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
strengthened and I know that you will want to do the same at 
your end. 
I " as inlpressed '1ith Ambassador Porter and it seems 
to me that he probably has the necessary qualifications to 
give you thr:' support you will need in thif" field. 
\'1hile I 
knDl'l that he is already doing so, I suggest that your desig-
nation of him as being in total charge , under your supervision, 
of all asp~cts of the rural construction pro€7'am would consti-
tute a cle&r and visible sign to the Vietnamese and to our O\ffl 
people that the Honolulu Conference really marks a ne,-, departurc 
in this vital field of our effort there . 
We will of course be 
glad to give prompt support with llhatever additional personnel 
or administrative rearrangement this I:I.ight require "rithin the 
}.tission or Embassy. 
Please let me know your arm thoughts on 
this , 
"I hope that in June ve can have a full report shm ... ing real 
progress in our war on social misery in Viet Nan. 
In the mean-
while, I know that you will not hesitate to let me know how .... 'e 
can be of belp . 
UNQUOTE 
"The President has instructed that a copy of this message 
be given to 
HCG~orge Bundy." ~/ 
The 'President also sent Gencral Hestrnoreland a personal telegram that day, 
lThicb did not mention the oatter of civilian organization . 
To Hestmore-
land he .;-rote : 
IIQUOTE . 
I \tant you to kno''; that I greatly cnj oyed the oppor-
tunity of talking directly \.r1th you at Honolulu and I hope you 
share my arm satisfaction on the outcome of that conf'erence . 
I ,,"'as much encouraged by your presentation of the military 
situation and nm ... have even rore pride end confidence in what 
you and your men are doing . 
I feel that \',e are on the right 
track 81ld you can be sure of my continued support. 
"I know that you share my mm vie.rs on the equal importance of 
the war on social misery) and hope that \that we did at Honolulu 
\-,iil help assure that we and the Vietnamese move forward with 
equal vigor and determination on that front . 
As I have told 
Ambassador Lodge and ar.l telling Tbieu and Ky , I hope that in 
June I can have a r eport of real progress in that field . 
With 
continued proeress in the military field , we should by that 
time be eblp. to see ahead ma.re clearly th", road to v i ctory over 
both aggression and Ilisery. 
lIyou have my complete confidence and genuine admiration and 
absolute support . 
I never forget that I have a lot riding on 
you. 
un'lUOTE .")) 
. 54 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
I}cclassificd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
After the mood at the Warrenton Conference , the push for reorgani-
zation should have come as no surprise to the higher ranking members of 
the Nisslen . 
Discussions centering around the role of the Dep.lty Am-
bassador (and earlier, the DCM) as a manager for the mushrooming Civilian 
Mission had been going on for a long time , as Lodge and Porter ..... 'ell knew . 
With Bundy in Saigon to ease the issue , Lodge answered the President on 
February 15 , 1966 : 
"1 do indeed want to 'tighten and strengthen the orgMi-
zation for support of the rural construction program at this 
end, ' as you tell me you plan to do at yours . 
And I applaud 
your determination to treat ' rural construction ' (ror which 
there should be a better name) * as an end in itself and on a 
par with the military. 
"As you say, Ambassador Porter is already putting a great 
deal of effort into this 'Hark . 
I have never made a formal 
announcement of this fact because it seemed to me that the 
arrangenent was ,,;arking pretty "iell as it was and that public 
announcement was unnecessary . 
Also , I felt the U. S . Government 
.(. Lodge had for some time been troubled by the phrase "rural construction" 
__ the literal translation of' the Vietnsmcse Xay Dung Nong Than - - which 
he felt suggested bricks and cement, rather than tbe entire proer~ of 
"revolutionary uplift" ",bich he advocated . 
Right after the Honolulu 
meeting, be asked each meI:1ber of the I.fission Council for suggestions on 
hOl' better to translate the Vietnamese phrase . 
Out of the suggestions 
that he received {including Hestmorcland ' s recot:lIIlendation that "'e ought 
to leave the phrase alone , just translating the literal meaning of the 
Vietnamese as accurately as possible) , Lodge chose the phrase I1Revolu-
tionary Development ." At about the sa'11e time , the GVN dropped the word 
"rural" from the name of the Ministry of Rural Construction (thus, Xay 
DWlg I~ong Than was replaced. by Xay Dung) . 
Lodge and Ky then announced 
that henceforth the Vietnamese Ministry ","ould be kno .... 'n in English as the 
r.1inistry of Revolutionar~r Development, and the overall program called 
Revolutionary Development (RD) . 
To this dey, the semantic gap remains 
unbridged: the Vietnamese call it the Ministry of Construction (Eo Xay 
DWIg), except when they are talking in English to an American ; the 
Americans call it the !,:ORD . 
The same applies to the program: moreover, 
the confusion is often compounded by the ~act that in most informal 
discussions between Americans and Vietnamese, the term most often used 
is still "pacification . 11 
See , for example , the Horking Group session 
at Honolulu , F':!bruary 7 , 1966: HIt is perhaps significe.nt that this was 
thc only time in the course of the meeting , i . e . , at the outset, that 
the ne'.rly adopted U. S. term ,ras heard . 
TJ"o"roughout thc renaL'1der of the 
l-iorking Group discussion , the term pacification "'as used almost exclusively. 
In this connection, the Saigon U, S. reprcaentatives present at the oeeting 
are inclined to doubt the actual appropriateness of the new term . . . ) H 
55 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
.. 'as getting really enthusiastic "'ork witham thought of' self' 
from both Porter and Lansdale under present conditions . 
I felt 
public snnouncements might tlake Lansdale feel less important · 
without ~~y ~ain for Porter who does not need or want a sense 
of importance . 
I believe that Americans are pulling together 
here as never before and that there i s a spirit here " .. hich is 
worth ~ore than organization charts . 
"But I can see the merit of the i dea that a public desig-
nation of Porter as being in total charge of the Aoerican 
aspects of the rural construction program would ' constitute a 
clear and visible sign to the Vietnamese and to our own people 
that t he Honolulu Conference really marks a new departure . ' 
"There are pitfalls to be avoided . 
For example , I assume 
that if Porter ' s ne'l~ allocati on Ireans that I 'am so t aken up with 
U. S. visitors that I am in effect separated from 'rural con-
struction , ' then "Fe would take a ne'of look at the whole thing . 
Huch of the I:1ost tine- consuming job out here is not r ural con-
struction but is the handling and educating of U. S. visitors . 
Although it must be done at the expense of the war effort ,,'ithin 
Vietnam, it is vitally jmportant . 
But it was not until the end 
of January that I was free enough of visitors to start holding 
meetings of U. S. ' rural construction' workers to probe and to 
prod and to develop the ' check- up ' maps .... ·hich I showed you at 
Honolulu. 
"I suggest, therefore that I nake the following announce-
ment: 'I have t oday designated Deputy Ambassador Hilliam Porter 
to take fulJ. charge, under my direction, of all aspects of Hark 
of the United states i n support of the progr~s of community 
building, presently described as rural construction, agreed at 
the Honolulu Conference . 
This includes overcoming by police 
methods the criminal, as distinct from the military aspect of 
Viet Cong violence ; and the training and installation of health , 
education and agricultural workers and of community or ganizer s . 
Ambassador Porter will have the support of a small staff drawn 
from all elements of the U. S. f'.iission , and he and I vlill continue 
to have the help of General Ed"!ard Lansdale as senior liaison 
officer and adviser . 
Ambassador Porter vfill continue to serve 
as r;ry Deputy in the full sense of the '1iord, but he "'ill be re -
lieved as far as possible of all r outine duties not connected 
with the Honolulu prograc. 
We are deternined that this program 
for peace and progress shall be carried forward .,ith all the 
energy and skill of a fully coordinated U. S. Mission effort , 
always ~ith fulJ. recognition that the basic task of nation-
building here belongs to the people of Viet Nam and to their 
government . ' 
56 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
I 
I 
I}cclassificd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"I know that you appreciate that this is essentially a 
Vietnamese program and that what Porter would be supervisin~ 
would be the American end of it. I recognize the existence of 
the view t~~t we must i~ effect impose detailed plans and some-
how rW1 the pacification effort ourselves . 
But I do not share 
it . 
Nothing durable can be accomplished that way. 
"As :far as 
I administrative rearrangement I is concerned, 
I would like Sam Hilson to take the office now occupied by 
Porter J with the l'ank of J.1inister) and to serve as tUssion 
coordinator . 
I intend to put Habib in the office now occupied 
by Chadbourn with the rank of Minister . •• . 
"As soon as I receive word from you that this is satis -
factory, I intend to make the announcement about Porter. 
The 
other appointments can be announced later . 
LODGE !! Y 
From the beginning, Lodge, who felt that " a public announcement \-ras 
unnecessaryH except as a "clear end visible sign to the VietnB.l'!l.ese and 
to our own people that the Honolulu conference really marks a new de-
parture," !if 'Has not overly enthusiastic about the public designation 
of his deputy as being "in total charge" of something. 
The documentation 
is virtually nonexistent on the question of whether Lodge ' s feelings on 
this point acted as a constraint on Porter, but it is hard to escape the 
strong impression that from the outset , Lodge was going along with the 
new authority for Portcr only with reluctance -- and that Porter had to 
keep this in mind whenever he considered putting heavy pressure on an 
agency. 
Porter also had his reservations about his role . 
\Olhether these were 
caused by a feeling that the Ambassador was not going to support him in 
sho,,..downs with the agencies , or whether his caution came from some more 
basic feelings, there can be no doubt that he did not , in the period 
between Honolulu and 1.1anila, perform in his new role as the President 
and his senior advisors had hoped. 
And thus once again , at Manila, a 
r eorganization vras approved -- this time a much broader and far-reaching 
one. 
Porter ' s intentions ..... 'ere accurately foreshadOl'led in his first state-
ment to the Nission Council on the subject, Februc'.l:-Y 28, 1966. 
He sought 
then to allay the fears which the announCerJ.ent had raised in the minds of 
the agency chiefs in Vietnam: 
ITAmbassador Porter described briefly his new responsibili-
ties as he sees them in the pacification/rura~ development area . 
He pointed out that th~ basic idea is to place total responsi-
bility on one senior individual to pulJ. together all of the civil 
57 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
aspects of revolutionary developnent . 
He sees this primarily 
as a coordinating effort and does not intend to get into the 
middle of individual agency activities and responsibilities . 
As he end his staff perceive areas which require attention and 
action by a r esponsible agency, he ..... ill cell this to the 
attention of that agency for the purpose of emphasis ; he in-
tends to suggest rather than to criticize . .. ftJnbassador Porter 
noted that the non-priority areas are still getting the bulk 
of the resources , which neans that He have not yet really con-
centrated on the priority areas and which also flags the 
necessity to bring the priority areas into higher focus . 
He 
will have a great interest in the allocation of resources such 
as manpower ; yet he recognizes that under wartine conditions 
which prevail in Vietna.-n there will al~-rays be some inequity . " d.J 
It is important to emphasize that the appointment of Porter to his 
new role did indeed improve the organization of the Hission , and that 
Porter did aCCOl'!:!:plish SO.::i.e of the things that vlashington ha.d hoped he 
would - - but, under the constraints outlined belo,«, he did not get 
enough done fast enough to sat;lsfy the grovrine impatience in Hashington 
with the progress of the effort . 
This impatience vTas to lead to the 
second reorganization and the formation of the Office of Civil Operations 
(OCO) after the Manila Conference . 
Although the inpaticnce of Hashington 
was justified, the f act is that under the ne,i' and limited mandate Porter 
hnd, he did begin the process of pulling together CIA, USAID, and JUSPAO , 
and forcing them to work more closely together . 
He also tried to focus 
General Lansdale I s liaison efforts with General Thang more closely on 
items related to our opera.tional objectives . 
He presented a ne,i and 
vastly improved image of the ci viliE'..n mission to the press, many of v:hom 
came to regard him as the most competent high official i n the Mission . 
To one semi-official observer , Henry Kissinzer , ... ,ho visited Vietnam first 
in October of 1965, and then returned in July , 1966, the situation looked 
substantially improved: 
liThe organization of the Enbassy has been vastly improved 
since my last visit . 
The plethora of competing agencies , each 
operating their own program on the basis of partly conflicting 
and largely uncoordinated criteria, h~s been replaced by an 
increasingly effective structure under the extreoely able 
leadership of Bill Porter . 
Porter is on top of his job . 
I t 
... :ould be idle to pretend that the previous confusion is wholly 
overco~e . 
He has replaced co~petition by coordination ; he is 
well on his way to imposing effective direction on thc basis of 
carefully ccnsidered criteria. 
At Jeast the basic structure for 
progress exists. 
v:here eight Jr.ontbs ago I hardly kne" where to 
begin, the probleI:l now is how to translate structure into per-
formance -- a difficult but no insuperable task . II Y 
Dcspite Kissinger I s hopeful words, there "'as a .srov:ing tendency in 
\'lashington to demand more out of .the Nission that it \{US then producing. 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
I 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Proje("1 Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
In a paper written in August , 1966, Robert H. Komer , whose r ol e in the 
r e- emphasis of pacification will be discussed in the next section, wrote: 
ttTbere is a growing consensus that t l-te US/GVN p acifica -
tion effort needs to be stepped up, that management of our 
pacification assets i s not yet producing an acceptable r ate 
-of r eturn for our heavy support investments, and that paci-
:fiestlon operations should be brought reare abreast of our 
developing military effort against the ~'VA and VC main force . 
The Pr esident has expressed this view, and so has Ambassador 
Lodge among others . 11 11 
Why did Por ter not live up to the expectations of Hashington? Hhile 
the documentation is weak on this point, the following r easons can b e 
deduced from the available evidence, including discussions with people 
who worked in both Sai gon and Hashington: 
1. 
The Ambassador was not fully backing his Deputy , and Porter 
was never sure of Lodge ' s ~ 
in l.tission Council meetings , 
i n teleerams, in discussions with the agencies . 
Many 
senior 
officials of the USG , including the President, bad told Porter 
that he had their full support, and that they expected him to 
manage the r·1ission . 
But on a day- to-day basis, Porter had to 
get along with the Ambassador, .... rho was still (and legitimately 
so) the boss . 
The result .... 'e.s a considerable gap bet ...... een .... 1hat 
high officials in Hashington considered Porter ' s mandate , and 
what Porter felt he .... rould be able to do without antagonizing 
the Ambassador . * 
* This problem ,,'as. foreshadmred in a r emarkable way in 1963-1964 . 
After 
visitine Vietnam in December , 1963, the Secretary of Defense sent 
President Johnson a memorandum in which he pointed out that the r,lission 
"lacks leadership . , . and is .not working to a common plan , .. J.:y impression 
is that Lodge simply does not know how to conduct a coordinated adminis -
trati on .. , 
This has of course been str essed to him both by Dean Rusk 
and myself ( and also by JOM t.lcCone), and I do not think he is con-
sciously r ejecting our advice ; he has just operated as a l oner all his 
life and cannot r eadily change now . 
Lodge's newly-desi gnated deputy , 
Davi d Nes , was with us and seems a highly co:mpetent team player . 
I have 
stated the situation frankly to him and he bas sai'd he .... 1ould do all he 
could to constitute .... ihat .... 'ould in ef'fect be an executiv e committee opera-
ting below the level of' the Ambassador ." It is fairly ,",'ell established 
t hat nes , what:ver his o .... m ability and short'::omings was unable to 
establish an " executive committee operating below the l evel of the Am-
bassador," and that , as a matter of ract his every attempt to move in 
the direction indicated by the Sec~etary further alienated him from 
the AI:lbassador . 
The presumed lesso:l in the incident was that it is 
difficult and dangerous to tell one man ' s deputy that he has to assume 
broad responsibility and authority i f t he top man does not want this 
designation made . 
59 
TOP SECRET -
S en~itive 
I 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NNO 633[6. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
2. The agencies involved -- AID, USIA, and CIA - - were hostile 
to the De" 
design~tion :freD the outset . 
Since every agency 
paid lip- service to the De"'- role of the Deputy Ambassador , 
it is difficult to document this fact . 
But it is virtually 
self-eyjdent: since every agency "ras being told that its 
chief representative in Saigon nO\-, 'tiorked for the Deputy 
Ambassador, a career Foreign Service Officer , there was un-
happiness with the system in both Saigon and Washington. 
I,len like the Director of' JUSPAO, who had served in Vi etnam. 
since January of' 1964, W1d the CIA Station Chief, who re-
tained a completely independent communications channel to 
Washington , 'Here not going to yield any portion of their 
autonomy ,dthout some quiet grumbling and invisible foot -
dragging . 
To overcome this r eluctance was not as easy for 
Porter as Washington had perhaps hoped , particularly in 
light of Lodge ' s attitude . 
3 . 
1he '~ashington organization did not parallel the Saigon 
structure it .. ,as suoposed to SUQDort . end in fact actually 
prevented strong and. continuous support . 
\-lith legitimate 
legal and traditional responsibilities for programs overseas , 
each agency in "lnshington was understandably reluctant to 
channel their guidance through the Deputy Amb~ssador , Hhose 
authority did not seem to be derived from the normal letter 
of authority to all Chiefs of Hission sent by President 
Kennedy in 1961. 
The agencies, noreover, also had a special 
problem with regard to Vietnam: 
Congress ..,as being far more 
rigorous in its revie, .. of the Vietnam program than it ,,,as in 
most other areas . 
The Noss Subcor:unittee on Overseas Govern-
mental Operations, for example, vIas sending investigating 
teams to Saigon regularly, and issuing "tell-publicized reports 
criticizing the AID program across a broad front . 
The Sena-
torial group tbat reviews CIA programs "'as shm·ting considerable 
concern ..,itb the nature and size of the cadre and counter-
terror programs . 
And beyond that, there was the normal budge-
tar~ process , in which each agency generally handles its own 
requests through an extremely conplex and difficult process . 
Each agency >ras bound to try to cOI::Illlunicate as directly as 
possible with their representntives in Saigon . 
Thus , while 
some najor conflicting policies llhich had previously existed 
were ironed out through the ne~I system (suc}:l as the role of' 
the cadre), oany smaller , or second-level matters contained 
to receive the traditional separate agency approach . 
A good exemple of this "laS the vital issu~ of imprOVing Village/hamlet 
gover~ent
. 
Although consistently identified as a key element in any 
successful pacification pl'ogrrun, inproving the war-torn village structm'e 
seened to escape the rUssion orGanizationally . 
Responsibili toy for advice 
and assistance to the GVH lUnistry of Interior (later the Commissariat for 
60 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
• 
I}cclassificd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Administration) , rested ... lith the USAID Public Administration Division, 
which in turn '\las at the third level of the USAID, r eporting to the 
USAID Director only through an Assist~~t Director for Technical Ser-
vices . 
"[ithin the Public Administration Division (PAD) itself', to make 
matters ",:orse , improving village/hamlet government was only one of' a 
large number of activities for which PAD was responsible -- and in the 
eyes of many traditionally-minded professional public administrators , 
it ~id not automatically come first . 
other issues of obvious importance -- such as budgeting, strengthen-
ing the l-1inistry, improving the National Institute of Administration, 
sending officials to the U. S. for participant training -- all came within 
the normal PAD program as outlined in the AID Country Assistance Program 
(CAP) for FY 67, and, moreover , they required more r esources , more Ameri-
cans, nore attention at high l evel s o:f AID , than the Village/hamlet 
government problem. 
\-lhen Ambassador Porter directed AID , in f.fay of 1966, 
to begin massive efforts to improve village government , his orders were 
obeyed to the extent they could be within the context of' previous AID 
commitments . 
The result was a further stretching of the already taut 
USAID/PAD staf'f, since no previous commitments or programs were cut back 
to provide man and/or money f'or village government . 
At the same time , other sections of the t.lission which were expected 
to support the renewed emphasis on local government ,.;ere not producing 
as r equested . 
JUSPAO, asked to support the eff'ort with psychological 
operations , agreed in principle but f'ound its existing list of priorities 
basically unchanged. 
The Embassy Political Section , which should have 
supported the effort at least to the extent of urging through i ts politi-
cal contacts that the GVN revitalize the village structure , simply had 
better things to do. 
The CIA was also asked to support the effort ; with 
their cadre assets , they were in a crucial position on the matter , par-
ticularly since some of the critics of the cadre had stated that the 
cadre actually undercut village government instead or strengthening it 
(as they claimed) . 
Again, the CIA gave lip service to the idea, without 
making any significant chal'\ge in their training of the cadre at Vung Tau. 
In this situation, P~bassador Porter tried several times to get 
action, each time received enthusiastic, but generalized, <Hords of agree-
ment and support from everyone, and finally turned his attention to other 
matters ; with the crush of business, there ",as alvray.s a more :immediate 
crisis . 
61 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B. 
Hashington: 
Komer as the Blol-rtorch 
The Harrenton conference had discussed not only the reorganization 
of the 1-1ission :tv Saigon, but -- far more ging~rl.y -- the need for a 
more centralized management of the effort in Washington . 
After the Honolulu conference the President decided to take action 
to change the vlashington structure on Vietnam, but not in quite the "lay 
suggested at Harrenton . 
I'lhile many people at Warrenton , particularly the 
State representative, had hoped that the President ,,,ould designate one 
man, with an interagency staff, as the overseer of an integrated political-
military-diplomatic-economic policy in Vietnam, the President decided to 
reduce the scope of the job, and give one man responsibility for what was 
coming to be called tiThe Other War . n 
Thus, for the very first time , there 
would be a high- r anking official -- a Special Assistant to the President 
-- l-lbose job would be to get the highest possible priority for non -military 
activities . 
In effect, the President had assured a place at the decision 
coul'lcils in Washington for someone \-lith built-in pro-pacification, pro-
civil side bias. 
This was Robert \~ . Komer, whose strenuous efforts in the 
next fe", months l-rere to earn him the nicknar::Le of "The Blowtorchft (given 
to him by Azbassador Lodge, according to Komer). 
How much authority the President intended to give Komer is not clear . 
It is quite likely that the issue was deliberately left vague , so as to 
see "Ihat authority and what accomplishments Komel' could carve out of an 
anbiguous r!S,Al-i and his r eady access to the President . 
On f-1arch 23 , 1966 -- six weeks af'ter Hanila -- Joseph Califano, 
Special Assistant to the President, sent the Secretary of Defense an 
EYES ONLY draft. of the NSA!·I setting up Komer's authority. 
In the cover-
ing note , Califano said, "He l-,ould be particularly interested in whatever 
suggestions you l-iould have to strengthen Komer ' s authority. " §/ In response, 
the Defense Department (the actual person making suggestion unidentified in 
documents) suggested only one minor change, and approved the NSAM . 
The other departments also suggested minor changes in other parts of 
the If SAM, and on 1·1arch 28, 1966, the President issued it as NSN-1 343. It 
said : 
"In the Declaration of Honolulu I renewed our pledge of 
common cOr:J:llittlent \-Tith the Government of the Republic of Viet -
nam to defense against aggression, to the work of social 
revolution , to the goal of free self-government, to the attack 
on hunger, i gnorance and disease) and to the unending quest for 
peace . 
Before the Honolulu Conference and since , I have stressed 
repeatedly th3.t the · .... ar on human misery and want is as fundamen-
tal to the successful resolution of the Vietnam conflict, as our 
military operations to ",ard off aggression . .. 
In my view, it is 
62 
TOP 
SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
I}cclassificd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
essential to designate a specific focal point for the direction, 
coordination and supervision in Washington of U. S, non-military 
programs relating to VietnSJ:l. 
I have accordingly designated 
Mr . Robert vi . Komer as Special Assistant to me for carrying out 
this responsibility. 
"I have charged him and his deputy, Ambassador vlilliam 
Leonhart, to assure that adequate plans are prepared and coordi-
nated covering all aspects of such programs, and that they are 
promptly and effective~ carried out . 
The responsibility "lill 
include the mobilization of U.S. military r esources in support 
of such prograos . 
He will also assure that the Rural Construc-
tion/Pacification program and the programs for combat force 
employment and military operations are properly coordinated. 
I1His functions "rill be to ensure full and timely support 
of the U.S. in Saigon on matters within his purview .•. 
I1In addition to "lorking closely with the addressee Cabinet 
officers he will have direct access to me at all times . 
I1Those CIA activities related solely to intelligence collec-
tion are not ai'fected by this NSAM. I/ 9J 
Mr . Komer was in business, lli th a small staff and a mandate, as he 
sa"l it, to prod people throughout the government , in both Hashington and 
Sai gon . 
Combined with a personality that journalists called "abrasive ," 
his mandate resulted in more pressure being put on the civilians associated 
with Vietnam than ever before , and in some understandable frictions . 
Komer's significance in the re-cnphasis of pacification is important, 
and oust be dealt with brief~ , although this section does not r elate his 
story in detail . 
Fir.st , there was Korner ' s influence on AID . 
\'lith little difficulty, 
he established his ability to guide AID, and began to give them direct 
instructions on both economic and pacification matters . 
AID , previously 
with limited influence in the Hission' s pacification policy, found its 
influence diminished still further . 
Of more significance was Komer ' s emphasis on the RD Cadre program, 
r un by the CIA. Together with Porter , he recommended a premature expan-
sion of the progran, in an effort to get the program moving faster . 
On 
April 19, )966, ftfter his first trip to VietnaJl\, Koner told the President : 
T1Cadre Expansion . Hhile the RD program has some question-
able aspects , it sea~s the most promising approach yet developed. 
The RD ministry led by General Thang is better thsn most , and 
the Vung Tau and Montagnard training centers are producing 5500 
trained men for insertion in 59-man teams L~to 93 villages 
every 15 ",·eel;:s . 
63 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DMc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"But Porter sees even this rate as insufficient to keep 
up with ' the gt'O'Iting military capability to sweep the VC out 
of key areas .' 
He urges r apid expansion via building another 
training center (which he ' d like to get Seabees to build) . 
The aim is .. :oughly to double cadre output from 19,000 to 
39,000 trained personnel per year . 
He thinks this rate could 
be reached by end CY 1966. 
I agree with Porter and will press 
this concept at the Washington end." }!}j 
Plans were approved , and construction began on the second training 
center. 
But by the end of 1966 it was r ecognized that the attempt to 
double cadre training would only weaken their quality, which was sh~~y 
to begin with. 
The construction of the second center was abruptly baIted . 
Komer and Porter had miscalculated badly. 
Komer also sought to influence the military in both Saigon and 
Washington to give more attention to the pacification effor t . 
In cables to Saigon --
~ost of them slugged with his na~e , and thus 
known as "KoI:lergra'lls" -- Komer sought to prod the I·fission forward on a. 
wide variety of programs . 
One of his most recurring themes was the Chieu 
Hoi prografJ\ * and in time his urgings did contribute to a more successfUl 
progra!'!1 , \Olith a high-ranking AI:lerican official in Ambassador Porter ' s 
office Horking on nothing else, in place of the previous ad hoc arrange-
ment between JUSAPO and USAJ]) . 
-
--
Another r ecurring theme v.'as refugeeo, but here he was less success-
ful, particularly since the U. S. Mission was never able to determine 
whether or not it desired to stimulate ~ore refugees as means of denying 
the VC manpower . 
His cables on this complcx issue were characterized by 
an absence of objective , but at l east he vlas addressing frontally ques-
tions fe'l-' other people v,ould raise at ~ : 
"For Porter from Komer : 
\Je here deeply concerned by grow-
ing number of refugees . 
Latest reports indicate that as of 
31 August , a total of 1,361,288 had been processed . . . Of course , 
in some ways, i ncreased flow of refugees i s a plus . It helps 
* For example : "Porter fran Komer : Highest authorities interested in 
stepping up defection programs . 
\'ihile recognizing limitations Chieu 
Hoi program and inadequacies GVrl adninistration , program has achieved 
impressive res1llts end shown high retU!'n in terms modest U. S. support 
costs . 
Greatly concerned by two recent administrati ve decisions t aken 
by GVN ... " 11/ 
Or : "To Porter from Komer: USIA eager help maximize 
success both Chieu Hoi and RD programs, in which highest authorities 
vitally interested . . . " gj 
Or: "For r·1ann and Casler from Komer : 
Would appreciate your follOwing tbrough on coordinated set of action 
proposals to energize le.gging Chieu Hoi progrext ... i·le are concerned 
e.bout drop-off in returnees si,nce Apr;tl. .. Bell and 'l·1arks concur ." W 
64 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
I 
I 
Declassified per Executille Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND I)rojcct Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
deprive VC of recruiting potential and rice grmlers , and is 
partly indicetive of growing peasant desire seek security on 
our side . 
"Question arises , however , of '-Ihether ,,'e and GVN ade-
quately set .lp to deal v1ith increased ref\:.gee flo" .. of this 
magnitude. 
AID has programmed much larger refugee program. 
for IT 67, but is it enough? • • Only 1·1ission wO'llld have answers , 
so intent this cable is merely to pose question , solicit bids 
for increased support if needed, and assure you I would do all 
possible generate such support ." 14/ 
On another controversial issue, Land Reform, Komer repeatedly pressed 
the Nission for public signs of progress , but by the time he went out to 
Saigon as General Westmoreland's deputy in 1967, he -- and apparently the 
President - - were still unsatisfied . 
But perhaps the most important role Komer played was to keep the 
general subject of paci~ication before the President, to encourage 
Jt.mbassador Lodge to talk pacification up , and to constitute a one-man, 
full-time, nonstop lobby for pacification within the USG . 
After his first trip to Vietnam, for example , Komer reported to the 
President that 1I',:hile our splendid military effort is going quite well, 
our civil programs l ag behind •. • To achieve the necessary results, we must 
ourselves give higher priority to (and expend) certain key pacification 
programs , especially cadres and police -- if necessary at some e~enge to 
the military effort . " 12./ 
Komer ' s memorandum constitutes only a small proportion of the infor-
mation and suggestions reaching the President and his senior advisors on 
Vietnam, and the intention of this paper is not to suggest that they "rere 
in any sense definitive documents which shml the direction o~ U. S. strategy 
in Vietnam. 
But it seems clear that Ko~er was the first senior o~icial 
in Washington to make a major effort to put pacification near the top of 
our conbined civil-military effort , and that he had a particularly ad-
vantageous spot fl'OIl ,·rhich to try. 
He had authorized back-channel com-
munications with the ~.mbassador and Deputy Aobassador in Saigon, apparent 
access to the President, and the umbrella of the White House. 
His memoranda to tbe President over bis year in rlashington showed 
considerable change in thinking on many issues , but a consistent support 
for more pacification . 
A small sample is revealing: 
"Key asp::cts of paci:fication deserve tighest priority --
and greater emphasis . 
Unless "e and the GVN can secure end 
hold the countryside cleared by military operations, we either 
face an ever larger and quasi-permanent military commitment or 
risk l etting the VC infiltrate again •.. 1 personally favor more 
65 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633[6. By: NWD Date: 20[ 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
attention to the Delta (IV Corps) region, which contains eight 
out of Vietnam ' s 15 million people and is its chief rice bowl 
.. . Clearly we must dovetail the military ' s svreep operations 
and civil pacification . 
My impression is that , since the 
milita.....-y are moving ahead faster than the civil side vre need 
to beef up ~he latter to get it in phase . 
There ' s little 
point in the military clearing areas the civil side can 't 
pacify. 
On the other hand , security is the key to pacifica-
tion; people won't cooperate and the cadre can 't fUnction till 
an area is secure . .. 
"Somehm-l the civil side appears reluctant to call on mili-
t ary r esources , which are frequently the best and most readily 
available . 
I put everyone politely on notice that I 
.... fould 
have no such hesitations -- provided that the case was demon-
strable -- and that this vIas the express request of the 
Secretary of Defense . II !:2.1 LCited Supra.7 
In August of 1966 , Kamer produced the longest of his papers, and the 
one he considered his most important . 
Its title was "Giving a Ne., Thrust 
to Pacification ." In addit ion' to discussing the substance of pacification, 
the paper made some further organizational suggestions, which clearly fore -
sh&.dmfed the second reorganization of' the Mission 1-,hieh took place after 
the Manila conference . It is worth quoting in some length (all underlining 
is part of the original) : 
"There is a gro'/lillg consensus that the US/GVN pacification 
effort needs t o be stepped up, that management of our pacifica-
tion assets is not yet producing an accept.able rate of return 
for our heavy investments , and that pacification operations 
should b e brought more abreast of our developing military effort 
against the NVA and VC main force . 
The President has expressed 
this vie,.l, and so has P..mbassador Lodge among others. 
"I. 
What is pacification? 
In one sense , "pacificati on" can be 
used to encompass the .!hole of the military , political, and civil 
effort in Vietnam. 
But the term needs to b e narrowed dO'",,rn for 
operational purposes , and can be reasonably well separated out 
as a definable problem area . 
Itli' ,."e divide the US/GVN problem into four main components , 
three of them show encouraging progress . 
The campaign against 
the major VC/~~A units is i n high gear , the constitutional pro-
cess seems to be evolving favorably , and .re expect to contain 
inflation wl.ile meeting most needs of the civil economy . 
But 
ther e is a fourth problem area, that of securing the cou.~try­
side and getting the peasant involved in the struggle against 
the Viet Cong, where we 'ere lagging way behind. It is this 
problem area which I ,·rould term pacification ... 
66 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D:ue: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"At the risk of over-sllnplification, I see management of 
the pacification problem as involving three main sub-tasks ; 
(1) providing local security in the countryside -- essentially 
a military/police/cadre task ; (2) breaking the hold of the 
ve over the ~eople ; and (3) positive programs to win the active 
. support of tnc rural population . 
II ••• Few argue that we can assure success in Vietnam without 
also winning the 'village war.' Chasing the large units around 
the boondocks stili leaves intact the VC infrastructure , with 
its loca1. guerrilla capability plus the weapons of terror and 
intimidation ... So winning the 'village war ' "'hich I will loosely 
call pacification. seems an indispensable ineredient of any high-
confidence strategy and a necessary precaution to close the 
guerrilla option . 
" . .. Yet another reaSon for stressing pacification is that 
~he U. S. is supporting a lot of assets in being which are at 
the ooment poorly employed. 
Even the bulk of ARVN , which in-
creasingly sits back and 'wetches the U. S. take over the more 
difficult parts of the war against main enemy units and bases, 
might be more effectively used for this purpose . . . Thus , even if 
one contends that pacification as I have defined it is not vital 
to n win strategy, stepping up this effort would add little to 
present costs and might produce substa.'1tial payoff's . 
"Beyond this, the time is psychologically ripe for greater 
emphasis on pacification. 
South Vietnamese confidence is grow-
ing as the U. S. turns the tide . 
NelT US/FW military forces are 
arriving to reinforce the campaign against the main force ; their 
presence "Till release much needed assets to pacification . 
The 
GVN , fresh from success against the Buddhist led struggle and 
confidently facing an election process leading toward a consti-
tution, also has been making the kind of tough decisions --. 
devaluation , turnover of the Saigon port to military management , 
etc . - - that ,dll be needed in pacification , too . 
"In SUM., the assets are available , and the time is ripe for 
en increased push to .lin the ' village ,,,ar . ' 
"III . 
What is Holding Up the Pacification Efforts? 
The long 
history of the Vietnam struggle is .replete \'rith er.rorts to secure 
the countryside . 
l·!ost of theo., like Diem ' s strategic hamlet 
program, proved abortive .. . . Some of the chief difficulties we 
confront are sue;gested bela'';; 
"A. 
vIe had to go after the major VC/NVA units first . .. It 
,,"'as a ma.tter of first thi:1gs i'irst ... 
• 6"( 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"B . 
The VC/NYA have been able to select the "lea..~est point 
in any embryonic evn pacification effort and destroy it with a 
lightening attack ... 
"C . 
There are inherent difficulties _n the pacification 
process itself .. . 
"D . 
Lack of high quality assets . 
Pacification has also had 
t o take a back seat in the sense that it generally gets only t he 
l owest grade GVN assets - - and not enough of t hese . .. 
"E. 
Last but not least , neither the U. S. nor the GVN have 
as yet developed an adequate plan , program, or management 
str ucture for dealing with pacification . . , 
"l. 
The JCS and I·LACY are so preoccupied, hOliever j usti-
f iably, with operations against the major VC/NVA units that they 
are not able to pay ' enough attention to the lcc al securi ty aspects 
of pacifi cation . .. 
"2 . 
There i s no unified civil/military dir ection within 
t he GW.,. 
"3. A simil ar di vided responsi bility prevails on the 
U. S, side . . , 
"4. 
Nor docs there yet appear t o be a ",ell- understood 
chain of cO!l".mand from Porter even to the civilians operating in 
t he f ield ... 
"5 . 
There is no integrated Civil/military pl an for 
pacif'ication on either the U, S. or GYN side •. , 
111'1 . 
Ho'" do .... e step up Paci fication? 
... It demands a multi-
f aceted civil-military response . . . 
liA . 
Provide more adequate, continuous security for the 
l ocales in which pacification is taking place . 
This is the 
essential. prerequisite . 
None of our civil programs in the 
countrysi de can be expected to be effective unless t he area 
i s r easonably secure . 
Nor , unl ess the people are protected , 
end their attitudes likely to change in favor of the GVN .. . 
To provide security requires the assignment on a l ong term 
basis of' en('lugh assets to defeat these re;'ident VC companies 
and battalions , in addition to providi ng 24-hour security to 
the people until they are able to assi st in providing their 
own protecti on , 
This is pri.m8.l.'ily the task of RF and PF , 
supported by the RD cadres and police ... Some knOtY'ledgeable 
, 68 
TOP SECRt~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
experts contend that even if we improve the .. • RF, PF, police , 
and cadre , they are together insufficiently to extend Jocal 
security much beyond existing secured areas . 
They feel that 
lacking mobility and heavy firepower , these f orces must be 
thickened "ah a liberal sprinkling of re('ular ARVN units 
'1:orking in the area outside the ilmnediate area undergoing 
pacification . 
I do not suggest that ARVN regulars gainfully 
empl oyed in battle against the enemy main forces be so diverted . 
I do urge that those ARVN forces not now fully engaged -- a 
substantial fraction of the total be used to contribute directly 
to improving local security . 
nB . 
We must devote more effort to breaking the hold of the 
VC over the people ... 
"C. 
Carry out positive revolutionary development programs 
to win active popular support . 
The cliche of winning support 
by offering the people a better life through a series of inter-
r el ated RD progrEDs has great relevance i n Vietnam . .. 
liD. 
Establish functioning priorities for pacification . . . 
liE. 
Better Area Priorities... A greater stress on pacifi-
cation logically means greater stress on the Delta .. . 
ItF • 
Concentrate additi onal r esources on pacification ... 
Arguments ~ade in the past that pacification is a delicate sub-
j ect to be approached only 'Hith care and precision have lost 
some of their relevance as the intensity of '1Tarfare has increased 
•.. Increase : 
Police . . • 
RD Cadre .. . 
Material Support for Pacification . . . 
The U. S. Agricultural Effor t • . • 
Chieu Hoi. .. 
Village/Hamlet Administration ... 
"G. 
Set more performance goals . .. 
"H. 
Rapidly extend the security of key roads ... 
"I. 
Systematize the flm' of refugees . . . 
"J . 
Get; better control over rice .. . 
!IV. 
Hm; can Pc.cification be l·Ianaged f.lore Effectively? 
UA. 
Restructuring the GVN . .• 
. 69 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~'1 Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Place the RD and PF under the RD Ministry ... 
Establish a single line of conmand to the province 
chiefs ... 
Remove the Division from the pacification chain of 
command ... 
Strengthen the authority of the Province Chiefs •.. 
Appoint civilian chiefs in selected nrovinces and 
" 
districts ... 
liB . 
Parallel strengthening of the structure is essential. 
U. S. 
l eadership has often sparked major pacification steps by the GVN. 
The structure for managing pa.cification advice to the GVN , and direct 
U. S. military/civilian support, have evolved slowly as the U. S. con-
tributions have grmm . 
Once it was possible to coor dinate the U. S . 
pacification effort through an interagency committee for strategic 
bamlets . 
Later the I·lission CotU1cil concept ~.,as used extensively. 
In the "lake of the Honolulu Conference, the PI'esident appointed Am-
bassador Porter to tcke charge of the non-mili tary effort in Vietnam. 
Several highly qualified people nO'\OT give Porter the nucleus of a 
coordination and operations staff. 
Hovlever ... the U. S. management 
structure must be strengthened considerably more . 
"There are three basic alternatives , each building on the pre-
sent structure, whi ch could provide the needed r esult . 
T",'o of them 
are based on the principle of a ' single manager ' over both civilian 
and mil itary assets by assigning command responsibility either to 
Porter or 'vlestmoreland . 
The third accepts a continued division 
between the civil and military sides ~or nunerous practical reasons , 
but calls for strengthening the management structure of both . 
IIAlternative No . 1 -- Give Porter operational control over all 
U. S. pacification activity ..• 
"Alternative No . 2 -- Retain the present separate civil and 
military cO!!."!l.o.nd channels but strengthen the management structure 
of both J.IACV and the U. S. 1-:ission . 
This option, recognizing the 
practical difficulties of putting U. S. civilian and military 
personnel under a sUlgle chief , would be to settle for improved 
coordination at the Saigon level. 
"To facilit9.te inproved coordination, however, it would require 
strengthening the orgoni zation for pacification within NACV and the 
U. S. JUssion. 
r~cv disposes of by f ar the greater number of Ameri-
canS vCJrking on pacification i n the ~ield . 
It has advisory teams 
spendine nost of their time on pacification in 200 out of 230 
districts a~d in all 43 provinces . 
These teams -- not counti ng 
"10 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
advisors at division, corps and all tactical Q~its down to 
battalion -- number about 2000 men compared with about one-
eighth this n~ber from all other U.S. agencies combined. 
"Howevel , the senior officer in MACV tee.ling with pacifi-
cation as his principal function is now a colonel heading the 
J33 staff division . 
t.!oreover, with 400, 000 U. S. troops soon 
to be committed, General Hestmoreland, his subordinate comman-
ders, and his principal staff officers must spend increasing 
time on militury operations associated ",ith defeating the 
VC/NVA main formations . 
Therefore , management of the tremen-
dous advisory resources ,'lith HACV inevitably suffers regardless 
of General "'estmoreland's personal effort to give balanced 
attention to both . 
"Hence there might be merit in CO~IUffi·1ACV. having D. senior 
deputy to manage pacification within j·1ACV e::;d pacification 
advice to the JCS , as well as throughout the Vietnamese military 
chain of cocmruld. 
Key staff sections , such as J33, Polwar Direc-
torate, Senior Advisor for RF/PF, could be controlled by a chief 
of staff for pacification responsive to the Deputy. 
Advisory 
teams at corps and division ;.;ould r eCeive guidance and orders on 
pacification from the Deputy . 
Province and district advisors 
",ould receive all orders , except routine administrative instruc-
tions , through the pacification ch~~el . 
"To parallel the MACV organiz.ation end provide a single point 
of liaison on the civil side, Ambassador Porter should have his 
own field operations office formed by merging USAID Field Opera-
tions , JUSPAO Field Services and CAS Covert Action Brnnch . 
Con-
trol over the people assigned would be removed, as in Alternative 
no. 1, from their parent agency. 
All civilian field personnel in 
the advisory busL~ess would also r eceive their guidance and orders 
from the Deputy Anbasse~or . 
I1For this dual civilian-military systeo to operate effectively, 
the closest coordination would be required between the offices of 
the HACV Deputy and the Deputy Anbassador . 
Since it is difficult 
and dangerous to separate military ~~d civilian aspects of paci-
fication at the province level, nost policy guidance and instruc-
tions to the provinces hopefully ,."ould be issued jointly and be 
r eceived by the senior military and civilian advisors who would 
then develop their plans together. 
"I would still f avor a single civU/nilitary team chief in the 
province , even though he would have tvo bosses in Saigon talking 
to him through different and parallel chains of COn;r:l.aJld. 
Alterna-
tively, since I·rACV already has a senior advisor in each province , 
it would be possible similarly to assign a single civilian as the 
71 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECR.!!.""T - Sensi ti ve . 
Vietnamese province chief's point of contact on all non-military 
matters . 
All other civilians in the province .. :ould be under his 
control . 
"Alternptive no . 3 - - Assign responsi'hility for pacification 
civil and military , to COWJS1:·iACV . 
This is not a ne\ .. suggestion, 
and has a lot to recommend it . 
In 1964 ) General i'lestmoreland pro-
posed that he be made "executive agent" for pacification . 
lolACV 
at that time had an even greater prcponderance of field advisors 
t han it does today , and ,·ras devoting the bulk of i ts attention t o 
pacification . 
Since the military still has by far the greatest 
capacity among U. S. agencies in Vietnam for management and the 
military advisors outnUF~er civilians at least 8 to 1 in the fiel d , 
HACV could readily take on responsibility for all pacification 
mattel·s . 
"Turning over the entire pacification management task to 
Cm.rus~·!ACV "auld require him. to reorganize his staff to handle 
simultaneously thc very large oilitary operations business involv-
ing U. S. , Free Horld and yietnamese forces end the civil/military 
aspects of pacification at the same time . 
The USAm , JUSPAO , and 
CAS Covert Operations staffs would come under CO;·IDSi·!.I\CV I s control 
.... here they liould be used as additional "co!!lponent commands , " 
In 
t his case , it might be desirable to have a civilian deputy to 
cmruSlJ.ACV for paciI~ication . 
"Also appropriate under this concept i.-auld be a single U. S. 
advisory team) under a teaD chief, at each subordinate echelon . 
The result would be a single chain of command to the field and 
coordinated ciVilian/military pacification planning.and operations 
on the U.S . side . 
The U. S. Mission ,,;ould speak to Vietnamese 
corps and division cOIElanders, province chiefs and district chiefs 
with a single voice . " W 
In t he latter part of this lengthy mem.orandu:n , Komer clearly fore -
shadO" .... ed both the formation of aco after the Hanila conference - - his 
Alternative Ho . 2 -- and the merger of OCO end MACV into t-!ACCORDS after 
Guam - - his Alternative No . 3 . 
But when he sent the paper to Saigon 
.lith his deputy in nid-August , the reaction froo Lodge , Porter , and 
vlestrooreland i-laS uniformly negative : they asked him., i n effect, to leave 
them alone sinee they were sati sfied with their present organization . 
But Komer had. also distributed his paper around t'/ashington , and was 
l obbying for anotber change i n tbe structure of the I;jission, al.though he 
remained, in August , vague as to which of the three alternatives he put 
forv .. ard he personally favored . 
Hhen other senior officials of govern-
ment began to votce feelings t hat additional organizational changes were 
necessary in the Mission in Saigon, the die ,,,as cast . 
72 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~'1 Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Another major attribute of Komer '.las his strong public and private 
optimism. 
He produced for any journalist willing to hear him out facts 
and figures that suggested strongly that the war ",'as not only winnable , 
but being won at an accelerating pace. 
To the President he sounded the same them~ : 
"After almost a year f'ull-til:'le in Vietnam} and six trips 
ther e, I felt able to learn a good deal more from my 11 days 
in country, 13-23 February. 
I return more optimistic t~~ 
ever before . 
The cumulative change since my first visit last 
April is drematic , if not yet visibly dcr.onstrable in all re-
spects . 
Indeed, I'll reaffirm even more vigorously my prognosis 
of last November (which fe~ shared then) that growing momentum 
would be achieved in 1967 on almost every front in Vietnam . II gj 
KOr:Ier believed in the concept of It sheer mass" -- that in time we 
.... lould just overwhelm the Viet Cong: 
"Hastef'ully, expensively, but nonetheless indisputably, we 
are winning the war in the South. 
Few of our progr2!:ls -- civil 
or military -- are very efficient, but \·:e are grinding the 
enemy dmm by sheer weight and mass . 
And the cumulative impact 
of all we have set in ~otion is beginning to tell. 
Pacification 
still lags the most} yet even it is moving fonrard . 
"Indeed , my broad feeling, with due alloviance for over-
simplification , is that our side now has L~ presently programmed 
levels all the men , money and other resources needed to achi eve 
success ... n ~ 
In summary , Komer ' s 13 months in \olashington "\<lere spent steadily 
raising the priority of the pacification and other non-military efforts 
in Vietnam . 
While he never Has in a controlling position .... rithin the 
Hashington bureaucracy, he succeeded in meJdng those who were more 
aware of the !lather war" (a tem be used cor.tinually until Ambassador 
Bunker announced in t·lay of 19Eq that he did not recognize that there 
was such a thing) . 
'·'hile it cen be no more than speculation, it would 
also appear that Komer played an important role in inserting into high-
l evel discussions, including Presidential discussions , the pacification 
priority. 
Thus, when General \'lestmoreland visited the President at the 
LBJ r anch in August, 1966, Komer put before the President a series of 
uacification-related subjects to be used during the discussions . 
This 
happened again at ManilE., where some of the points in final communique 
were simile.r to things Komer had been pu~hing I_arlier, as outlined in 
his August memorandum . 
73 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projeet Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C. Study Groups and strategists : S1.1r:mler 1966 
In the a~termath of Honolulu, task forces end study groups were suddenly 
assembling , producing papers on priorities , on organize.tion of tlie Mission, 
on the rolc and ~ssion of various forces . 
They were all manifestations 
of the ne'll mood that had come over the Nission and Washington on pacifi-
cation. 
The advocates of pacification - - \lith their widely differing view-
points -- all saw their chance again to put for ..... ard their own concepts 
t o e. newly interested bureaucracy, starting with Komer and Porter . 
The most important of the numerous studies were : 
1 . 
The Program for the Pacification and Long-Term Development of 
South Vietnam (Short Title : PROVIf) - - conoissioned by the Army 
Chief of Sta~f in July of 1965, completed and submitted in 
March 1966; 
2. 
The Priorities Ts,sk Force -- formed in Saigon in April 1966 
by Deputy Ambassador Porter, conpleted in July 1966; 
3. 
The Inter-Agency "Roles and Nissions ll Study Gl'OUp 
by Porter in July 1966, completed in August . 
formed 
~~ile the recommendations of these studies were never accepted in toto, 
they all play key roles in the development of strategic thinking in Hashing-
ton end Saigo:J. during the latter p..~rt of 1966, and they continue to be in-
fluential tOday . 
PROVU - - As early as the SU!lll:ler of 1965, General Johnson saw the need 
to select a superior group of officers , and set them to .'fork on a long-
term study of the problem in Vietnam, 
The study ",as intended for internal 
Army use, and was for a while after its completion treated with such deli-
cacy that Army officers were forbidden even to discuss its existence outside 
DOD , 
This was unfortunate , because in content it was far -ranging and thought-
fUl, and s et a precedent for responsibl e forward planni~~ and analysis which 
should be duplicated in other fields . 
PROVN \,'as charged with "developing nc:w sources of action to be taken 
i n South Vietnam by the United States and its allies , which will, in con-
junction with current actions , modified as necessary , lead i n due time 
to successful accomplishment of U,S, ains and objectives . It 
\-lith this broad 
mandate, PROVl'T staff spent eight months questioning r eturning officers f r om 
Vietuam, studying the history of the country, drawing parallels with other 
countries, anal:rzing the structure of the U, S Mission; and making recom-
mendations . 
In the end, the PROVN team decided that there was "no unified 
e:ffective pattern" to the then- current efforts in Vietna!:1, and submitted 
a broad. blu€;print for action , 
Its thesis ",as si!!lple : 
"The 
orated, 
success . 
situation in South VietneJ:l has seriously deteri -
1966 me.y well be the last elm.nce to ensure eventual 
' Victory' can only be achieved through bringing 
74 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
( 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD DMc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
the i ndividual Vietnamese, typically a rural peasant, to 
support willingly the GVN. 
Tne critical actions are those 
that occur at the village , district, 
a.~d provincial levels . 
This is where the ",ar must be fought ; this is "1here that 
war and the object which lies beyond it must be won . 
The 
following are the most important specifi c actions required 
now: 
Concentrate U. S. operations on the provincial level 
to include the delegation of command authori ty over 
U. S. operations to the Senior U. S. Representative at 
t he provincial level . 
Reaffirm Rural Construction as the foremost US/GVll 
combined effort to solidify and extend GVN influence . 
Authori ze more direct U.S. involvement in GVN a ffairs 
at those administrative levels adequate to ensure the 
acco~plishment of critical programs. 
Delegate to the U. S, Ambassador unequivocal authority 
as the sole ~nager of all U.S, activities , resources, 
and personnel in-country , 
Direct the Ambassador to develop a single integrated 
plan for achieving U. S. objectives in SyrI. 
Reaffirm to the world at large the precise terms of 
the ultir'..ate U. S. objective as stated in NSAN 288 : 
A free and independent non-co~unist South Vietnam .. . n 1!l/ 
Beyond this frank and direct summary, the study had hundreds of recom-
mendations , ranging from the specific and realizable to t he vague and 
hortatory. 
In summary, the PROVN ~;as a major step forward i n thinking . Although 
as mentioned above, its value was reduced :for a long time by the restric-
tions placed on i ts dissemination, the cand.or with lThich it addressed 
matters was probably pOssible only because it originated within a single 
sel'vice, and thus did not require the concurrences of an i nter-agency 
study. 
For example, the PROVN study addressed directly a point o:f such potential 
ecibarrassment to the U.S . GoverriClent that it is quite l ikely an inter-agency 
group would not have addressed it except perhf'l.ps in oblique terms : 
nA PROVN survey • . . revealed that no two agencies o:f the U. S. Govern-
ment viewed our objectives i n the same marmer . 
Failure to use th3.t 
wlequivocal statement of our fundamental objective -- a :free and 
independent, non- cor::=lunist South Vietnao -- set forth in NSPJ·I 288, 
hinders effective i nter-aeency coordination and the integrated appli-
cation of U.S, support efforts." ?:9.1 
75 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D:ue: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
As for the study' s IIhighest priority" activities, PROVN recommended: 
" (1) 
Combat Ouerations -- the bulk of U, S. and nRoiA. 
Forces and d,esignated, RVNAF units should be directed against 
enemy base aJcns and against their lines o~ communication 
in SVN, Laos , and Cambodia as required; the remainder of 
Allied force assets must ensure adequate momentum to activity 
i n priority Rural Construction areas . 
" (2) 
Rural Construction - - i n general, the geographic 
priorities should be, in order , the Delta, the Coastal 
Lowlands , and the Highla!tds ; currently the highest pri-
ority areas are the densely populated and rich resource 
Delta provinces of An Giang, Vinh Long, Dinh Tuong, Go 
Cong, and the Hop Tac area surrounding Saigon . 
"(3) Economic Stability -- current emphasis must be 
directed toward curbing inflation and reducing the excessive 
demands for skilled and semi-skilled labor imposed upan 
an over-strained economy . .. " 
On the management of the United States effOrt -- which PROVU f'ound ex-
tremely poor -- the recommendation was to create a single manager system, 
with the Ambassador in charge of all assets in Vietnam and the mission of 
producing a single integrated plan . 
PROVN suggested major steps in the 
direction of giving the Ambassador a stronger hold over the military. 
Of greatest importance -- aside from the r eorganizational suggestions 
was the PROVN conclusion on the supremacy of Rural Construction actlvities 
over everything else : 
"Rural Construct1on must be designated unequi vocally 
as the major uS/Gvrr effort . It will require the commitment 
of a preponderance of R~~ and GYN paramilitary forces, 
t oeether ';lith adequat.e U. S. SUppOl't and coordination and 
assistance . 
Without question, vi llage and hamlet security 
must be achieved throughout Vietnam .. . RC is the principal 
means available to broaden the allied base , provide secur-
i ty, develop political and milite.ry leadership, and pro-
vide necessary social ref'orm to the people .. ," ?lJ 
To this end , PROVIl suggested a division of r esponsibility among the 
f orces : 
"The need to sustain security pervades every ramifi cation 
of RC . • • The various fOl·ces capable of providing this envi ron-
ment must be unified . .. at ~~e province level. 
They ~ust in-
clude the ARvn as a major cooponent -- as many of its battle-
t ested units as can possibly be devoted to this mission. 
These integra.ted national security forces T.lust be associated 
76 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and i ntermingled l;ri th the people on a long-term basis . 
Thei r capacity to establish and mainte.in pi .... olic order and 
stability must be physically and continuously cr edible . 
The key to achieving such security lies i n the conduct 
of effective area saturation tactics , in end around popu-
l ated areas , which deny VC encroachment opportunities . " m 
Finally, the study advocated a far stronger system of leverage f or 
Ameri can advisors in the field - - "mechanisms for exerting U. S. i nfluence 
must be built into the U.S. organization and i ts methods of operation . " ?;J/ 
The PROVN study concluded .. rith a massive "Bluepri nt for Nati onal Action" 
which was never implemented. 
But the inf'luence of the study '\olas substan-
t ial. Hitbin the Axmy staff, a respansi bJ.e and select group of of ficer s 
had recommended top priority for pacification . 
Even i f t he Army staff 
sti ll r ej ected parts of the study, they ,.,ere on notice that a study had 
been produced within the staff which suggested a' substanti al r evisi on 
of pri orities . 
The PROVN study had some major gaps . 
Proceeding f rom the unstated 
assumption that our co~~itment in Vietnam had no impli cit time l imi ts , 
i t proposed, a strategy which it admitted .. ,ould take years - - perhaps well 
into the 1970 ' s 
to carry out . It did not examine alternative strate-
gies that oight be derived from a shorter time limit on the war . 
I n fact , 
t he r eport made no mention of one of the most crucial vari ables in the 
Vietnam equ'J.tion - - U. S. public support for the Admi ni stration . 
Further, the r epOrt did little to prove that Vietnam was ready £~ 
p9.cification . 
This "f act" was taken for granted, it seems - - a fault com-
mon to most American-produced pacification plans . 
',.1hilc PROVN did suggest 
geographi c priorities , they were derived not even in part from the ar€a ' s 
r ecepti vi ty to pacification but exclusively from the location and strate-
gi c importance of the area . 
Thus , the same sort of errol' made i n Hop Tac 
was being r epeated in PROVN ' s suggestions . 
NACV analyzed the report i n r·lay of 1966, calling i t "an excellent over -
all approach in developing organization, concepts and poli ci es ... " 
I n 
a l engthy analysi s of PROVN, ~~CV cabled: 
"As seen here , PRO'IN r ecolIlI!ends two I:I!I.jor ini tiatives 
essential to achieving U. S. objectives i n South Vi etnam: 
creation of an organi~tion to i ntegrate total U. S. ci vi l -
milite,ry effort, and exercise of greatly increased di rect 
U. S. 
i nvo lven~nt in G'lll activiti es . 
",MACV has long recognized need £01' the greatest possi-
ble unity of effort to gain U. S. objectives i n South Vietnam. 
1-!ACVe.grees Hith PROYrr c·oncept to achieve full i nteerati on 
of effort in attaining U. S, objectives i n South Vietn~ . 
Evolution of U. S. organization in Saigon is heading towards 
this goal. 
Dep'.lty Ambassador now has charge of revolutionary 
77 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
and economic development programs and Mo\CV is charged with 
military programs . 
In addition, special task force has 
been established by Deputy Ambassador to draft mission-
wi de statement of strategy , objectives , and priorities . 
In 
effect, thi~ task force is engaged in integrated planning 
whi ch under PROVN concept would be performed by supra- agency 
staff. 
PROVN proposal fOr de::;ignation of a single na.na.ger 
with supra-staff i s a quantum jump to achieve the necessary 
degree of military-civil integration . 
This final step can-
not be implemented by evolutions bere i n Saigon. It WQuld 
have to be directed and supervised from higbest level i n 
Hashington . 
"l·lACV i s i n complete agreemcnt with PROVN position that 
immediate and substantially increased United States direct 
involvement in GVN activities in form of constructive i n-
fluence and manipulation is essential to achievement of U. S. 
objectives in Vietnam. 
PROVN emphasizes that "leverage 
must originate in terms of reference established by govern-
ment agreement," and "leverae;e, in all its implications , 
must be'understood by the Vietnamese if it is to become an 
effective tool. " 
The direct involvement e.nd leverage en-
visioned by rROVlJ could range from skillful diplomatic press-
ure to U. S. unilateral execution of critical programs . 
MACV considers that there is a great danger that the extent 
of involvement envi sioned could become too great . 
A govern-
ment sensitive to its inage as champion of national sov-
ereignty profoundly affected by the pressure of militant 
minorities, e.n~ unsure of its tenure and legitimacy 'will 
r esent too great involvement by U. S. 
Excessive U. S. in-
volvement may defeat objectives of U. S. policy: 
development 
of free , i ndependent non-communist nation . 
PROVN properly 
r ecognizes that success can only be attained through support 
of Vietnamese people, with support coming from the grass 
roots up. 
Insensitive U. S. actions can easily defeat 
efforts to accomplish this . 
U. S. manipulations could easily 
become an American takeover justified by U. S. compulsi on 
to "get the job done ," Such tendencies must be l·esisted. 
I t must be realized that there are substantial difficulties 
and dangers inherent i n implementing this or any similar 
program. 
"Several important aspects of proven concept requi re 
comment, further consideration and resolution or emphasiS . 
Some of the more significant are : 
"Regarding U. S. organization, }lACV considers that any 
major reorgani7..a.tion such as envisioned by PROVN must be 
phased and deliberate to avoid confusion and. sl O'fl- do",n in 
ongoing progra~s ... 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"There appears to be an overenphasis cn mil itary control 
in PROYrf ~lhich may be undesirable . 
For instance, the study 
states that all senior U. S. representatives (SUSREPs) i ni t i -
ally \dU be U. S. military officers . 
This should not neces -
sarily be st~ted policy . 
~le senior U. S. representative , 
particularly at province level, should be selected on basis 
of major tasks to be performed, program emphasi s in a -particu-
l ar area and other local considerations . 
PROVN also l imits 
U. S. si ngle manager i nvolvement in military activi ties . 
I f 
single manager concept of a fully i ntegrated civil-military 
effort i s to be successful, military matters , such as roles 
and nissions, force requirements , and deployment s must be 
developed i n full coordination and be integrated with civil 
aspects . 
" PROVN proposal for enlarged. U. S. organizat ion for 
r evolutionary development , particularly at sector and suh-
sector l evels j will require both military and ci vilian staff 
i ncreases . It will necessitate further civili an recruiti ng 
and increased military input . 
Present shortage of quali-
f ied civilian personnel who desire duty in Vietnam ~ust 
be considered. It may fall to the military, as i t i s now 
happening to some degrec j to provide personnel not only for 
added military ~os it ions , but also for many of civilian 
fu-~ctions as well . 
"Regardless of what U. S. might desire, hOr7ever, our 
ef'forts to bring about new Vietnamese organizational struc-
ture must be tempered by continuous evaluation of the press -
ure sucb cbange places on Vietnamese leaders . 
Our goals 
cannot be achieved by Vietnamese leaders who are identified 
as U. S. puppets . 
The U. S. will must be asserted, but we 
cannot afford to ove~1helm the structure we are attempting 
to develop. 
"Accordingl y, NACV recormnends that PROVN, r educed pri -
marily to a concept ual document, carrying forward the mai n 
thrusts and goals of the study, be presented to National 
Security Council for use in developing concepts, policies , 
and actions to improve effectiveness of the Ameri can effort 
i n Vi etnam. " '& 
. 
The "Priorities Task Force" 
- - This group was set up at Ambassador Port er 1s 
direction in Ap~il 1966, following Komer ' s fi~st t rip to Vietnam, during 
which Komer had strongly urged that the r.ussion try to esta.blish a set of 
i nteragency priori ties . 
The actual work of this task force , ""hi ch had 
full i nteragency representation, lias consi dered disappointing by almost 
all i ts "consUIncors," particularly Komer , since it failed to come up lIith 
a final list of prioritic3 from Hhich the Mission and Hashington could 
derive their programs . 
But it '.-las by f~r the most ambitious task force 
the Hission had eyer set up, and it provoked considerable thought in the 
1·11ssion. 
79 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Its introductory section was a rather gloo~ assessment of the 
situation . 
As such, it was at variance with the then current assessment 
of the situation - - but in retrospect , it is of far greater interest than 
the recommendations themselves
~ 
"After some 15 months of rapidJ.y growing U. S. mili tary 
and political comnitment to offset a major enemy military 
effort, the RVN has been made secure against the danger of' 
military conquest, but at the same time it has been subjected 
to a seri es of stresses which threaten to thwart U.S, policy 
obj ectives ... 
11Tbe enemy now bas a broad span of' capability for 
interferi ng 
~iith progress toward achievement of U. S. 
objectives . 
He can simultaneously operate offensively 
through employment of guerrille. and organized forces at 
widely separated points throughout the country, thus tying 
down friendly forces, while concentrating rehearsed sur-
prise attacks in ~ulti -battalion or even multi-regimental 
strength ... . Tbe war will probably increase in intensity 
over the planning period (two years) though decisive mili-
tary victory for either side is not 1ikek. Guerrilla. 
activity will make much of the countryside insecure . 
Nore 
of the rural population will be directly affected, and the 
number of refugees and civilian casualties on both sides 
seem bound to rise . .. 
"Reasons for lack of success of the overall pacification 
program -- including all the stages from clear and secure 
operations to sustaining local government -- were varied. 
First, t he primary hindrance to pacification was the levI 
l evel of area security given active Viet Cong opposition . 
Second., political instability prevented. continuing and 
coher ent GVn direction and support of' any pacification 
program. 
Tbird, pacification execution has been almost 
",holly Vietnamese and can be supported only i ndirectly by 
the U. S. 
This has made it less susceptible to American 
i nfluence and more subject to political pressures and the 
weaknesses of Vietnamese administration and motivation . 
Fourth, no pacification concept since the strategic hamlet 
program has been sufficiently clear in definition to pro-
vide meaningf'ul and consistent operational gui dance to those 
executing the program. Fifth, given the pressure for success 
and t~ e difficulty of measuring progress the execution of 
pacification failed to emphasize the political, social and 
psychological aspects of organizing the people and thus 
eliciting their active cooperation . 
The material aspects, 
being both visible and less difficult to ioplement, have 
r eceived too much attention . 
Si}~h) there was an absence 
of agreed., definitely stated pacification roles and missions 
not only within the GVN and the U.S. Miseion but also between 
80 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
t he GVN and the U. S. Mission . 
This absence caused prolifera-
t ion of various armed and une-r:med eleoents not clearly related 
to each other . 
Seventh, a quantitative and qualitative lack 
of trained and motivated manpower to carry out pacification 
existed. 
In addition, insufficient empha.;is has been given 
t o training and orientation of local officials associated 
with t he pacification program. 
Eighth, lack of a well de -
fined organizational structure in the U. S. Mission created 
some confusion and conflicting direction of the pacifica-
tion effort . .. 
"During 1965 , military plans were developed to support 
r evolutionary development ; national priority areas were 
selected where special emphasis would be placed on revolu-
t ionary development, and a structure was established by the 
GVH extending an organizational frane\-lork for revolutionary 
development from national to district levels . 
Heanwhile , 
t he U. S. Nission has begun action to centralize direction 
for r evolutionary development to ensure coordL~ation of 
all ~!ission activities in support of revoluti onary develop-
ment . 
"A new approach was also ta."'en in 1965 t o bring coher-
ence to the use of cadre in the pacification process . 
Drat-T-
ing on a concept of armed political action teams , whose 
r elative success locally .... 'as at least partly owing to direct 
U. S. sponsorship and control, a combined cadre team approach 
",'as developed . 
A new orgenization, the Revolutional Devel op-
ment Cadre, was established, \-fhich brought together and re -
placed a number of disparate cadre organizations . 
The com-
hined cadre team approach includes armed units and special 
skills of relating to and assisting the people . 
The combined 
t eams form the basis of the present pacificati on program. 
"While these measures have helped to alleviate some of 
the problem areas \-lhich previously frustrated pacification 
efforts , some areas of major concern r emain; 
First area 
security where Revolutionary Developnent is being initiated 
i s not al '.-Tays adequate because of manpOll'er problems ; second, 
continued exi stence of various overlapping security forces 
f urther reduces effectiveness ; third, approved pacification 
concepts , roles, and missions agreed to by the U.S. and the 
GVll are l acking ; fourth , the effectiveness of t he new RD 
cadre teaLls remain to be tested and eval"'.lted ; fifth, exten-
sive training of local and other officials associated with 
RD still must be accomplished ; sixth, emphasis on rapi d 
expansion and the desire for immediate visible and statisti-
cal progress \·;ould operate against lasting results ; and, 
seventh, organizational development and functioning on 
both the GVH 31ld U. S. sides are as yet incomplete . '?:2./ 
* 
* 
., 
81 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
liThe situation described above suggests t hat the course of 
events in Vietnam during the next tHO years wi ll be significantly 
influenced by the following principal current trends . 
lIThe wa.- can be expected to i ncr ease ;.n i ntensity, but 
deci sive military vi ctory should not be expected. It will 
be basically a war of attriti on. 
Troop casualties should 
i ncrease on both sides , and civiljan casualties and refugees 
as 'flcll . 
The enemy can, if he chooses , increase still further 
t he rate of his se~i - covert i nvasion and the l evel of combat . 
"The enemy ·..,ill continue to build up his forces through 
infiltration from INN and recruitment for main force VC uni t s 
i n SVN to achieve a favorable relationship of forces . 
"At the same time, he will continue to reinforce his capa-
bilities for political action in the urban areas , to exploit 
anticipated future poli tical disturbances , to i ncrease his 
t errorist acts in the cities ) and '(;0 i solate the urban popula-
t ion fro~ the countryside . 
"GVN control of the countrysid.e i s not now being extended 
t hrough pacification to any significant degree and paci fication 
in the rural areas cannot be expected to proceed at a r apid 
rate . A new approach to pacification has been developed, but 
i t is too early to judge its effectiveness . 
I n addition, im-
portant problems requiring resolution remain . .. 
"The Vietnamese wi ll continue to face grave problems i n 
creati ng an e~fective system of government . 
Under present 
conditions 'fIe cannot realistically expect a strong GVH to 
emerge over the planning period, nor can we expect political 
unity or a broadening of the base of' popular support . 
The i n-
creased American presence , r i sing inflation and an image o~ 
consi d,erable corruption are issues which wi ll be i ncreasingly 
exploited by unfriendly and opportuni stic elements . 
U. S. i n-
f luence on political events continues to be l i mited 'flhile our 
r esponsibility 1'or Vietnam I s future is increasing." 5§) 
The Task Force divided. all activi ties i n Vietnam i nto categories of 
importance, and assigned them priorities in groups . Unfortunately, t he 
divisions were either too vague to be useful, or else they desi gnated, 
specific activit,ies , such as agriculture , to such a low posi tion t hat 
Hasbi ngton founCl the selecti on unacceptable . 
In i ts first r ank of im-
pOrtance the Task Force placed : 
"1. 
Those activities designed to prepare a sound 
pacificati on program primarily t hrough strengthening 
the human resources element of pacii'ication, and 
through coordinated planning . . . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"2. 
Those activities which draw strength a .. ·ay fron the 
enemy and add to GVN I S strength and image of concern 
for all its citizens •.. 
"3. 
Tl'ose psychological activities ~ hat support the war 
effort . .. 
"4 . 
Those activiti es that persuade the people that 
RV7~F is wholly on the side of the people and acting 
in their interests ... 
down through: 
"16. 
Those activities which develop the leadership and 
organization of non-governmental institutions , 
particularly youth groups ... II ?JJ 
It was scarcely a list !'rom .;hlcb one could assemble a coherent pro-
gram. 
Moreover, t he above list of 16 "highest priority" t asks , was followed 
by a group of ten "high priority" tasks -- inclUding strengthening provin-
cial governments , autor-omous municipal governments , better budgetary proce-
dures , better refugee programs , minority programs , and so on. 
These , in 
turn, were followed by a nine-point list of "high priority programs .
1I 
Into at least one of the 35 highest, high, or just plain priority activi-
ties , one could fit every program s-~d project then being pursued in Vi et-
nam. 
Furthermore, the proposal seemed to confuse inputs and outputs , 
placing in the same category "wishes" like "minimizing the adver:;e ictpact 
of and exploiting the opportunities provided by the American presence" 
(which was only "high priority") ,'lith "programs" like IIcreating a sound 
base f'or agricultural development . II 
The Priorities Task Force recommendations were used, unlike those of 
PROYN'. 
In the FY 67 Country Asststance Program (CAP) , submitted by AID 
to Congress that fall, the Task Force Strategy statement was used as a 
foreword, with Ambassador Lodge ' s approval. 
Moreover, the concept of 
priorities outlined i n the final paper was applied. to the AID program in 
Vietnam, with each activity being placed in one of the categories of pri-
ority . 
This did not r esult, however, in t.he origi nal objective of r edUCing 
the size of the program and focusing i t : 
i nstead, the AID program more 
than doubled in 1967, and a year later people were still complaining about 
t he lack of clear-cut prioriti es . 
(As a matter of fact, when Deputy Ambassa-
dor Eugene Locke returned to Hashington in September of 1967 with a II Blue-
print for Vietna.m, II be was told that it lacked any sense of' priorities , 
and was t oo" muc~l of a "shopping list . II) 
The "Roles and Missions " Study Group - - One of the Priority Task Force 
recomnendatlons was that the Mission should establish anpther group to examine 
the question of' the proper r ol e of each military and paramilitary and police 
and civilian force in the countrJ . 
This group was set up, under the chair-
manship of Colonel George Jacobson in July of 1966 , and_ submitted i ts final 
83 
l'OP SECRET - Sensi ti ve 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316. By: NWO Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
r eport to the J·lission Council on August 24 . 
The group was once again 
interagency, and it produced a paper of considerable value -- indeed , a 
paper which could well have served as a basic policy document for the 
Jtission and Hashingtol1 . 
The Study Gl'OUP made 8]. r ecommendations , uf which 66 were acceptable 
to all agencies of' the Hission . 
But even these 66 were not immediately 
adopted as basic doctrine . 
Because of inertia and weariness , rather than 
deliberate sabotage, the recommendations were never treated as basic pOlicy, 
and simply were carried out or not depending on the drive and des i re of the 
i ndividual officials associated wi th each individual recommendati on . 
The report began, as almost all Vietnam studies seem to, with a defini-
tion: 
ItRevolutionary Development consists of those mili tary 
and civil efforts designed to liberate the population of 
South Vietnam from communist coerCion; to restore public 
security; to initiate economic and pOlitical development; 
t o extend effective GVN authority throughout SVN; and to 
win the willing support of the people to these ends .
1t ?:§j 
From there it developed the most logical and coherent auproach to re -
t urning an area to GVN control and then gaining its support that had yet 
been produced by a group in either the Miss10n or Hashington . 
The report 
y/as hailed by Porter, by Komer, and by various mid-level officials . 
Jacobson 
himseli' was to be named Hission Coord.inator f'our months later, a position 
from which he could present his ideas directly to the Ambassadors . 
\'lhile , as mentioned above, the recommendations were never issued as 
Mission pOlicy in a group, many of' them found their .... ay into the main 
stream of the 1·liss10n through other means . 
Some of' the more controversial 
ones -- for example : 
"that Division be removed f'rom the RD Chain of Com-
mand" -- remained as patent ideas to be discussed within the government and 
with the Vietnamese, and to be acted on slowly. 
Since the report foresbadm/ed several major developments in paci fica-
tion, and si nce i t still has today an i ntrinsic value of its own, i t is 
worth quoting some of its major points : 
"High hopes are now pinned on the RD cadre) as the cr iti-
cal element of' success in RD. 
Unfortunately, there is a 
r eal danger it is being regarded as a panacea with curative 
pO"Hers it does not, of and by itself', pOssess . 
The intro-
duction of ~{D Cadre cannot alone achieve success in any of 
the tasks discussed above . 
Even cadre such as ~ay be avail-
able 1n six Ilonths . .. cannot compensate for the current fail-
i ngs and limitations of other fundamental elenents bearing 
directly on the RD process. 
rr •• • RD den:~nds for its success 
the GVN including its Al:med Forces . 
84 
radical reforr:1. ~rithin 
This r ef'orm ~ust start 
TOP SECRET - Sensi ti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
at the top . .. These radical changes in the GVN and RVNAF 
seem most unlikely to occur l,dthout a strong, focused and 
coordinated exertion of U. S. influence at high levels . .. 
REcm·~·iEND : - - That rut·lAF give increased emphasis to improv-
ing the performance and conduct of GVN military forces 
t hrough combined operations . . . 
- - That as the iJlcrease in Th'MAF strength permits , 
these forces engage with RVNAF in clearing oper ations in 
support of' RD ",ith the primary objective of improving the 
associated GVN forces .. . 
-- That in view of the deployment and capabilities 
of F\·J}.1AF in Vietnam and recognizing the nece~sity for increased 
security support to RD , the bulk of ARVN Divisional combat 
battalions be assigned to Sector commanders with only those 
Divisional battalions not so assigned to be under the control 
of Divisions .. . 
That the Division be removed from the RD chain 
of cOlll!ll.and • • • 
That Ranger units because of their frequently 
intolerable conduct toward the populace , be disbanded with 
individual Rangers reassigned * ... 
- - That RF and PF become Provincial and District 
Constabulary . •. 
- - That the Constabulary be placed under the 
Ministry of RD ... 
- - That National Police (Special Branch) assume 
primary responsibility for the destruction of the VC " in-
frastructure" .• . 
-- That Police Field Force be integrated into the 
Constabulary . . . 
-- That the Vietnamese Infor~ation Service (VIS) 
t erminate its rural information cadre operations and assume 
a supportinG role .. . for RD Cadre , t~chnic~l cadre , and hamlet 
officials ... " 29/ 
-I(- This was a recCl:lmendation which MACV particularly opposed, arguing 
that it "would seriously reduce ARVN combat strength. It 
i'lestmoreland 
added that he could not countena.llce the disbanding of units ~ .. hich had 
just received a Presidential Unit Citation . 
85 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NNO 633[6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
And so on. 
~fuat lay behind each recommendation was an effort to unify the 
various G~~ agencies and ministries working on paCification , streamline 
their operations , and, at the same time , increase U. S. inflUence. over those 
operations . 
While many items the Study Group recommended have still not been carri ed 
out, t here has been growing acceptance of the bulk of the recommendations . 
In its initial reaction to the -peper, NACV ' s Chief of' Staff wrote to Ambassa-
dor Lodge "that many actions have been taken or are being considered by 
~1ACV which support and complement the overall objectives envisioned by the 
r eport . 
There are, however, certain recommendations with which we do not 
agree . " ~ 
The most :ir.J.portant reservation that t·lACV bad, concerned the allocation 
of r esources for the RD effort : 
"He are confronted .. ,ith a determined, well-organized for ce 
operating in regimental and division strength. 
As long as 
this situation exists , it is imperative that the regular 
military forces retain first priority for the available man-
power . 
Once the threat of the enemy ' s regular forces has 
diminished and the defeat of external aggression is accom-
plished , then other programs should have the first priority 
for recruiting •. . 
I n addition, ~~CV opposed the rembval of Division from the RD chain 
of co~nd; suggested. a further task force to examine the Constabulary 
i ssue in detail; and opposed the suggestion that Special Branch Police --
which meant on the American side the CIA -- take over the anti- infrastructure 
effort . 
(On this latter point, the issue ,,:as finally resolved by an i n-
genious compromise structure under vlestmoreland and Komer called ICEX --
Intelligence Coordination and ExplOitation -- in July 1967. ) Finally, 
Hestmoreland rejected any internal changes in the l-1A.CV structure , as 
suggested by the Study Group. 
These had includ.ed: 
" -- t he establishment at !·!ACV Division advisory level 
of a Deputy Senior Advisor for RD, at Corps a Deputy Senior 
Advisor for RD, and at Cm,1US~·!A.CV level a Deputy CQ!;1USJ.~CV 
f or the entire HA,CV advisory effort and for RD . . . 
II 
__ changes i n the advisory rating system to empha-
si ze the quality of the advice and the accuracy of reports , 
rather than the perforr-ance of the organization/Vietnamese 
they a:i.vise . , . " JJj 
. 
USAID reacted favorably to the stUdy. 
In his memo to Lodge, the Acting 
USA]]) Director said that the· report "presents an antia.ote to our having 
been too indulgent with the GVN in the past to our peril and theirs ." 
Once again, ho· ... ever, as with HACV, USAID added sotie' reservations -- and 
the reservations all fell in areas i n -w-hich USAID would. have the action 
r esponsibility if something was to be done . 
USAID feared that the report 
86 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 63316, By: NWO Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
recomn:ended steps that would give the Ministry of RD too much strength, 
r eflecting the worry of their Public Safety Division. 
The Constabulary 
recommendations, which had far-reaching implications, were given a 
particularly rough going-over . 
For example , to protect its own embryonic 
structure , the Police Field Force USAID made the following comment on the 
recommendation that the PFF be integrated as units into the Constabulary: 
"USAID concurs with the l'eservation that PFF remain a 
separate entity with its essential police powers . " 3EJ 
The CIA also thought the report was "constructive and helpful," but 
listed a few "disagreements . " 
Once again, these pertained to those items 
in ... ·hich the lCA had a strong vested interest . 
They opposed strenuously, 
for example, the suggestion that the NACV subsector advisor - - the only 
American at the district level in alr:.ost every district -- "be given pri-
mary responsibjlity for monitoring the activities of the cadre . " Using 
the argument that everything possible be done to retain the civilian 
nature of the cadre, the CIA refused to let the NACV subsector advisors 
do what they were al.ready doing in many cases . 
The CIA and lM.CV both opposed the suggestion that a single Director 
of Intelligence be appointed to co~mand civilian and military intelligence 
structures . 
The CIA said that this '1ras "unwieldly and .um!orkable" because 
"this is not a theater of war . II W 
The Political Section of the Embassy also thought the study was 
"valuable , " but added that "it appears to neglect a number of' political 
considerations ." Beyond that) they supported ever:!" specific suggestion, 
while noting how hard it would be to carry some of them out . 
JUSPAO shared the fears of USAID that the report would concentrate 
more power in the hand s of the t<U.nistry of RD than it could usefully 
employ. 
JUSPAO thought that the Constabulary should be created, therefore, 
but placed under the ~linistry of Defense . 
JUSPAO also found the r emoval 
of the Division from the RD chain of command tlhardly feasible or realistic 
at this juncture" - - begging the issue of whether or not the United States 
should seek this as a valuable objective . 
When the exercise was over, there were many in the l-lission in Saigon 
who felt that the Study Group recommendations should have formed a blue-
print for action throughout the ~lission . 
They pointed out that almost all 
the recommendations were concurred in by every agency, and that these could 
be carried out ~ediately . 
The remaining 15 .... hich .... ·ere still not unani-
mously accepted. could then be discussed and perhaps resolved. 
In \'lashington J at least one high official., R.H. Komer, felt the same 
way, and urged the lussion to use the recommendations as policy. 
But 
somewhere behreen August 24, ...... ben the paper was submitted, and the end 
of 1966, the paper was relegated to the useful but distinctly secondary' 
role of another "study group," as its narr.e suggests , 
While everyone Has 
87 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Dcclas.<iificd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
complL~entary about the paper , no machinery was set up 1n Ambassador 
Porter ' s office to oversee the implementation of the recommendations . 
Hbile the agencies said that they agreed with most of the recomm~ndations, 
tbe all-important decisions as to bo''( fast and how hard to push forward_ with 
each recon:u:::.endatton was left to whichever agency "had the action" on it . 
This in effect left so:ne crucial decisions -- the variables in ow' effort --
outside the Deputy Ambassador ' s hands . 
He had no machinery for checking to 
see wbat the agencies were doing to carry out the suggestions they said they 
agreed with . 
He had virtually no staff to observe how the agencies were 
actually handling each problem, although it was obvious that success or 
failure on each item lay to a large extent in the method it was handled. 
Indeed, Porter had no good way to even find out \"hether the agencies really 
did accept the recor::mendati ons . 
He ... tas reliant on a knowledgeable but small 
staff which could only meddle in the internal matters of other agencies 
to a limited degree . 
It was these shortcomings in the new mandate to Porter that were be-
cooing evident in the late summer of 1966, and pressure began t o build 
in Hashington for another reorganization . 
The pressure and emp.~asis on pacification was also producing visible 
r esults in l·!.'\CV. 
On August 8, 1966, the J -3 of NACV, r·!ajor Genera.l Tillson, 
briefed the rUssion Council on bow !·:ACV intended to "give maximum support 
to RD. II 
The briefing ',Ias general, simplistic, a.nd shallow, but i t was a 
clear indication that General Hestrr.oreland and :·~<\CV were beginning to re-
SpOnd to the pressure from outside their cOmffiand that they should give 
RD more support . As such, it marked a major step for r·:<\cv. 
Tillson said 
that I1military operations must be used to assure the security necessary 
for RD to begin . All military operations are designed to\Iards this goaL .. 11 
He then went on to trace the degree to which criticism of ARVN was justi-
fied, and examine the suggestion that ARVN be re-oriented_ to suppor t RD --
something which was to become part of the Kanila coomunique only two months 
later: 
"The ARV!r has been at war continuously for a period of 
over ten years .• . Tne fact that ARVl{ today even exists as an 
organized fighting f orce is a tribute to its stamina and 
morale . 
"Since i ts inceptio:1, ARVN has been oriented., trained, 
~~d led towards the task of offensive operations ..• It i s diffi-
cult, in a short period of time, to redirect the motivation 
and training of years, and to offset the long indoctrination 
that offensive action against the VC is the r eason for the 
existence of the Army ... 
IIIn the 1967 campaign plan, we propose to assign ARVN 
the primary mission of providing direct support. to RD and 
US/~d Forces the primary mission of destroying VC/NVA main 
forces and base areas . 
Agreement has been r eached between 
88 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NNO 633[6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
General Hestmoreland. and General Vien that , in I , II and I II 
Corps areas, AR~Y will devote at least 50% of its effort 
directly in support of the RD progre.o: . 
In IV Corps , where 
t here are no U. S. forces , it lias agreed that ARVN might have 
to devote Ut to 75~ of its effort to offersive operations ... 
".@:eneral Vien has issued a dir ectiv e thay flatly states 
that , while some progress has been me.de , desired results 
are sti ll lacking on RD. It emphasizes that RD efforts 
must be on a par with efforts to destroy the enemy .. . These 
directives of General Vien resulted froe his conversations 
with General Uestoor eland ... II ~ ["Emphasis Addeg 
This was by far the strongest verbal support that NA.CV had ever given 
pacification, and it actually contained the kernel which developed i nto 
the important passage in the J·2.nila communique that conu:rl tted the RVNA.F 
t o support of RD . 
The change in mood in Sa igon among the Americans was 
Ambassador Lodge in his Heekly I{ODIS to the President . 
he began his cable with : 
re:flected by 
On August 31, 
"The biggest recent American event affecting Vietnam 
was giving pacification the highest priority which it has 
ever had -- making it, in effect, the main purpose of all 
our activities . .. 
liThe above was brought about in several ways -- by word. 
in General "lestmoreland
l s "Concept of Military Operations 
in South Vietnam" of August 24, and by the deeds of.the U. S. 
1st and 25th Divisions and the III i·jAF. 
There has also been 
t he new l>!I\CV proposal to revamp ARVIl and turn it into a 
force better suited to pacification . 
Also at a special 
meeting of the l·lission Council a stimulating paper was pre-
sented by the "Interagency Roles and r·lission Study Group" 
which would take RF and PF, now a part of the Vietnamese 
Armed Forces , make them into a "constabulary" and call it 
that . 
Police Field Force would also be included. in the 
Constabulary under this concept . II 32J 
1966, 
A week earlier, vlestmoreland had sent forward to CINCPAC and JCS a 
broad strategy statement for the coming year . 
He saw the time as "appro-
priate in light of the fact that we are on the threshold of a new phase 
i n the cor-flict r esulting from recent bt'.ttlef5.eld successes and from the 
continuing fio]!.:AF buildup. II 
After reviet-ting the course of battle since 
tile introduction of U. S. troops, Hestmoreland projected his strategy over 
t he neriod until I.ray 1 , 1967., as "a general offens i ve with maximum nrac-
ticai support to area and population security i n .further support of·RD.
1I 
He then added: 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"The growing strength of US/FW Forces will provide the 
shield and will permit ARVN to shift its weight of effort 
to ~~ extent not heretofore feasible to direct support of 
RD . Also,! visualize that a significant number of US/n1 
maneuver battalions will be comnitted to tactical areas of 
responsibility (TAOR) missions . 
These missions encompass 
base security and at the same tiI:1e support RD by spreading 
security radially from the bases to protect more of the 
population . . . 
"The priority ef'fort of ARVN f'orces will be in direct 
support of the RD program; in many instances the province 
chief will exercise operational control over these units •.. 
This fact notwithstanding, the ~~VN division structure must 
be maintained ... " & 
TMs long L'leSsage , with its "ne'ft lookll emphasis on pacification, was 
sent apparently not for CINCPAC's routine co~siderat ion ) as would be the 
normal case in the military chain of co~and , but for the edification of 
high-ranking civilian leaders in \OTashington . It ended with a comment 
added by Ambassador Lodge -- an Wlusual procedure in a military message: 
"I wish to stress my agreenent with the attention paid 
in this message to the importance of military support for 
RD. 
After ali, the main purpose of defeating the enel!lY 
through offensive operations against the main forces and 
bases must be to provide the opportunity through RD to get 
at the heart of the matter ) which is the population of SVN ." 37/ 
The ne;., emphaSi s on RD/pacification ;"Tas thus coning f'rom many sources 
in the late sumner of 1966. 
Porter and Komer, pushing the civilians 
harder than they had ever been pushed before, had not only improved their 
perfor:mance , but also to create pressures inside MACV for greater empha-
sis on RD . 
Hestmoreland, responding to the pressure , and finding the 
VC/NVA increasingly reluct~'1t to give battle, Has planning a t'w-pronged 
strategy for l ate 1966-early 1967: attack and destroy enemy base areas, 
and use more forces to protect and build up and expand the GVN population 
centers . 
90 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D:ue: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
D. 
The Single 1·1anager 
. By the late summer of 1966, as has been shown in detail in the preceding 
sections) the fla'iis in the structure of the U. S. Mission had been openly 
criticized in stud1~s or reports by the U.S. Army Staff (in PROVN) , by 
the Priorities 'l:ask Force and by the Roles and I.fissions Study Group in 
Saigon, by Robert Komer in repeated memoranda , and by various other visitors 
and observers . 
In addition to the \·rritten record, there were undoubtedly 
numerous private comments being made both in Saigon and Hashington, some 
of vrhich Here r eaching senior officials of the government . 
The options before the USG were , in broad outline , fourfold. 
The Mission 
could either remain unchanged, or else it could reorganize along one cf 
the three general lines which Komer had outlined in his August 7, 1966 
memorandum: 
Alternative One -- Put Porter in charge of all advisory and 
pacification activities , including the 
military; 
Alternative Two -- Unify the civilian agencies into a single 
civilian chain of command, and strengthen 
the military internally - - but leave civilian 
and military separate; 
Alternative Three - - Assign responsibility for pacification to 
Westmoreland and f·1A.CV) and put the civilians 
i n the field under his command. 
The Mission, as usual, argued for leaving the structure the way it was . 
Their arguments in this direction ,.,ere unfortunate , because in Hashington 
the Il".ood was certainly in favor of' some further changes, and by r esisting 
all suggestions uniformly) the i·fission .... ·e.s simply causing friction with 
Hashington and reducing influence on the ult:iroe.te decisions . 
The issue was joined more rapidly than anyone in Saigon had expected., 
because in mid-September,l966 , the Secretary of Defense weighed in on the 
issue in a direct \Jay, producing a Draft Presidential Memorandum which 
advoca ted handing over responsibility for pacification to COfiIUSM.O\CV. 
McNamara ' s draft said: 
"No"l that a Viet Cong victory in South Vietnam seeIlS to 
have been thtfarted by our emergency actions taken over the 
past 18 months , renewed attention should be paid to the 
longer-run aspects of achieving an end to the war and build-
ing a viable nation in South Vietnam. 
"Central to success, both in ending the \-lar and in winning 
the peace , is the pacification program. 
Past progress in 
91 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~'1 Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
pacification has been negligible . 
~~ny factors have contri-
buted , bu~ one major reason for this lack of progress had 
been the existence of split responsibility for pacifica-
tion on the U. S. side . 
For the sake of efficiency -- in 
clarifying our concept, focusing our energies , and increas-
ing the output we CM genera.te on the -part of the Viet-
namese. -- this split responsibility on the U. S. side must 
be eliminated. 
"He have considered various alternative methods of 
consolidating the U. S. pacification effort . 
The best 
solution is to place those activities 'o1hich are primarily 
part of the pacification program, and al l per sons eDbaaed 
in such activities , under cm·rusr·lACV ..• In essence , the r e-
organization would result in the establi shment of a Deputy 
C O~·fLlS:.I.o\CV f'or Pacification ,-,ho would be in command of all 
pacification staffs i n Saigon and of all pacification 
activities in the field . 
"It i s recognized that there are many important aspects 
of the pacificati on problem which are not covered in t his 
r ecommendation, which should be revie,,,ed subsequent to the 
appointment of' the Deputy COHlJS!,lACV for Pacification to 
determine whether they should be part of his task -- for 
example, the psychological warfare campa,ign, and the Chieu 
Hoi and refugee programs. 
Equally important, i s the ques-
t ion of ho\-r to encourage a similar management r ealignment 
of the South Vietnamese side, since pacirication i s r e-
garded as primarily a Vietnamese task . 
Also not covered 
by t his r ecommendation are important related national pro-
grams • . • Finally, there is the question of whether any 
organizational modification in \-lasbington is r equired by 
the reconmended change in Vietnam. 
"I r ecommend that you approve the r eorgani zation de-
scribed in this memorandum as a first essential step to\-lard 
giving a new thrust to paci fication . 
Under Secretary Ball, 
Administrator Gaud, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Director 
Helms , Director Marks , and Mr , Komer concur in this r ecom-
mendation ." ~ 
. 
This memoran~ was appar ently never sent to the President, but it 
was distributed, with a request for comments and concurrence, to Ball 
(Rusk being out of the country), Gaud, the JCS, Helms, Marks, and Komer . 
Only Komer and the JCS concurred, with the otl.ers producing alternate 
suggestions , 
The entire question .. ras handJ.ed as an "EYES ONLY" matter . 
The positions that were taken were: 
State opposed the recommendation . 
In i nformal discussions with Komer, 
Alex~hnson cited the failure of Hop ~ac (which seems irrelevant), the 
92 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~'1 Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"optics" of militarizing the effort , and the need to check with Lodge as 
r easons against actions . ~ 
AID a~'eed that the 'Present program had its faults, but resisted the 
idea of a HACV takeover .- Instead) they proposed a complex system of com-
mittees and. deputies for RD, who ",'ould r eport to a Deputy Ambassador for 
Pacification. ~ 
The JCS found that the proposal "provides an excellent rationale for 
an approach to the problem of appropriately integrating the civil and 
military effort in the i.rr.portant field of pacification" and concurred 
in the idea of a Deputy COl-lUS14ACV fOl' RD , 19J 
CIA and USIA both opposed the reorganization, although their written 
comments are not in the files . !EJ 
Komer weighed in with a lengthy rationale supporting the idea.. 
Although 
he may not have known it at the time , he was talking about the organizational 
structure he was going to fit into later. After agreeing that the need 
to get pacification moving \Olas great, and that "the military are much 
better set up to manage a huge pacification effort," he said that 6o - 7~ 
of "real job of pacification is providing local security . 
This can only 
be done by the military •.• " 
Komer then raised some additional points : 
1. 
The Ambassador should remain in overall charge . 
2 . 
l,!ACV should not assume responsibility 1'or everything, only 
the high payoff' liar-related activities . 
3. 
Logistic support should remain a multi-agency responsibility. ~ 
As the discussions on the subject continued, Deputy foJribassador Porter 
arrived in the United States for a combined. business-personal tri p . 
~ilien 
he found out ,""hat was being considered, he immediately made strong r epre-
sentations to McNamara, Komer, and Rusk. 
He also sent a personal cable 
back to Lodge , alerting him for the first time to what ,{as afoot i n Hashing-
ton: 
"Principal topic under discussion here is DOD proposal 
to bring both U. S. military and U. S. civilian resources 
needed to advance RD program under direction of Deputy 
C01·fUSN/~C V. 
This plan will be discussed with you during 
NcNamaro. visit . It ,{ould detach all civilian field opera-
tions from direct control of Saigon civilian agencies and 
would ple.ce thun under Deputy CmlJSI·1ACV for RD. 
In addi-
tion to controlling civilian field resources , latter would 
also manage U. S. military r esources with view to increasing 
their effectiveness in furthering RD programs . 
Deputy 
cmlJSm,CV \o1ould be responsible to Ambassador or Deputy 
Ambassador through Cm·iuS!-lACV. 
This at least is my under-
standing of -proposal which is being. strongly -pushed here . 
93 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
·"1 have taken position that this proposal and certain 
counter proposals put forward by civilian agencies here 
reQuire careful field study. 
In its existing form, as 
I understand it, it does not take into account the fact 
that militarization of our approach to thh important 
civilian program runs counter to our aim of de-militarizing 
GVl'I through constitutional electoral process •.• 
"I have been stressing here that our military are al-
ready heavily loaded with responsibility for achieving 
nilitary measures required to further civilian RD prograos , 
such as eVOking adequate cooperation from RVN ... I have 
emphasized need for r,1A.CV to grapple with problem of VC 
guerrilla activity during night, as distinct from main 
force activity during daytime which we n~~ know can be 
dealt with . 
l'h.ese areas \Olould appear to offf?r great possi-
bilities for applic~tion of military talent and I repeat 
that in my view que:;tion of burdening t·!A.CV further with 
complex programs (cadre , police, etc . ) requires careful 
field study t-thich I WOUld. have done promptly, if' you agree , 
by group similar to that which carried out 1Roles and Missions 1 
study." W 
This \Tas the background as Secretary l·lcrTaJIi!l.ra, Under Secretary Katzenbach, 
General lTbeeler , and Mr . Komer \Tent to Saigon in October . 
The issue had 
been deferred, and. \orhen the visitors returned, they \o70uld make reconnnenda-
tions to the President . 
Katzenbach, ~king his first trip as Under Secretary, 
was requested to look at the problem \lith a new eye and no prior prejudices . 
vlhen they came back from Saigon, Katzenbach and 1-1cN8:Jn8.ra both sent the 
President an icrportant memorandum. 
Katzenbach argued for a strengthening 
of Ambassador Porter ' s role, fL~d a deferral of the question of turning 
the RD effort over to !o1A.CV. 
NcNamara concurred, but with a different em-
phasis . 
The memorandums were dated October 14 and 15, 1966, less than two 
weeks before the J.:.a.n.ila conf'erence, and the recomnendations \olere accepted 
by the President . 
KAtzenbach 1s memorandum was , for a first effort after 
a short VIP trip, an unusually interesting one . 
Excerpts : 
1I ••• I believe decisive , effective RD depends on a clear 
and precise common understanding of the security as we all 
r ecognize to be the foundation of success in the 'other 
war. ' 
"To ill\lstrate the divergency of tllean~ngs, let me report 
briefly on a conversation I bad with a small group of' r eporters 
in Saigon. It quickly degenerated into a debate, not between 
the reporters and me, but between Hard Just of the t'lashington 
Post and Charles r-~ohr of the New York Times . 
l1Just argued heatedly that RD could not begin to be effec-
tive u.~less security were fil.':;t guaranteed both to the pease.nts 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D:ue: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
aDd to RD workers . 
'An AID man cannot do his job,' he said, 
'while being shot at by the VC . ' 
IIMom r esponded just as heatedly, that security could 
not come first -- because security from guerrillas is mean-
ingless and impossible until the peasant population is moti-
vated to support the GVN and deprive the guerrillas of havens , 
secrecy, and resources . 
IIObviously, the easy answer to this circular chicken-egg 
debate i s to say that both are necessary -- military protection 
and public J:1otivation against the VC. 
And yet even that answer 
is i ncomplete for it d~fines security only in the American 
frame of r eference ... 
"I lmow of no one \-rho believes we have begun effectively 
to achieve the goal of gaining the population' s active support, 
despite a series of pacification programs and despite even the 
budding early efforts of Ambassa.dor Porter ' s new program. 
liThe Military Asnect . · Secretary McNam!l.ra , Nr . Komer , Iun-
bassadors Johnson, Lodge, and Porter, Hr. Gaud, I , and all others 
who have approached the problen are perfectly agreed that the 
military aspect of RD has been spindly and Yleak . II }J5j 
**i(. i(.*** 
"This probably is the result of the entirely understandable 
preoccupation by l·:A.CV in recent months ylith the main force 
military emergency . 
HO"vlever justifiable this has been, a major 
effect has nonetheless been our failure effectively to press 
RVliAF to even start meeting their crucial RD responsibilities . 
II (I knO\i of no one who believes that these should be met 
principally by lunerican forces -- unless we should wish the 
yThol e RD effort to collapse once we leave . ) 
liThe Civil As-oect . 
Similarly, the work of' civilian agen-
cies has fallen short - - largely, but not only because of' the 
failure of RVNAF to provide a military screen behind which to 
work ... 
"Rather than engage in a civil-military debate, I think we 
should devote our efforts toyrard trying to devise an adminis-
trative structure that capitalizes on the assets each agency 
can off'er to RD . 
"vlhat should, be the elements of an ideal organization? 
"1. It should have maximum leverage on RVNAF to engage in 
clear and hold operations i n direct support of RDM efforts . 
95 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Project Number: NNO 633[6. By: NWD Date: 20 [ [ 
TOP SECRET 
~ Sensitive 
"2. It should have a single American "negative, I' nnti-VC 
channel -- that is a single commander for all action against 
commu..1\ist guerrilla f'orces . 
This commander ~;ould calibrate and 
choose among the various force alternatives ~~ depending on 
whether he helieved the need to be milita~y , para ~military, or 
police. 
"This com:oa.n.d would include complete responsibility for 
all anti-VC intelligence ~~ t hat is, concerning all VC suspects 
either in the infrastructure or in guerrilla units . 
"3. It should have a single, unified cbannel for all ' pOsi-
tive ' pro~people aspects of RD) irrespective of the present 
lines of command within civilian agencies , allowing a single 
commander to calibrate and assign priorities to relevant pOsi ~ 
tive programs on behalf of the peasantry. 
"This , too, would include the immediate expansion of and 
control over all 'pro-people ' intelligence ~- that is, detailed 
district-by-district and province ~by~province reporting on the 
particular gains roost wanted by the populace (land refolm, for 
example, in one province; or schools in another; or agricultural 
assistance in another) . 
"4. Sensitivity to pOlitical inputs and "rise political 
guidance of the ",hole process are needed to ensure that mili ~ 
tary programs suppOrt rather than negate efforts to win public 
suppOrt and participation . 
Failure to assure this -- which 
characterized French efforts in Indochina and Algeria, in con-
trast to civil-led, successfUl, British efforts in Malaya and 
the Fi lipino campaign against the Huks -- means that the very 
process of gaining security would be weakened and~rolonged, 
at increased cost in Vietnamese and American lives . 
"Thus, overall civilian command. of the RD program is needed 
for fundamental practical r easons , by no means f or considera-
tions of international image alone (though on the latter point, 
it must be observed that as soon as we 'Out ' the other war ' und,er' 
obvious milita17 control, it stops beiog the other war) . 
In 
particular, it is important not to block or r everse -- by the 
way ;-,'e organize our efforts - - the current genuinely hopeful 
Viet'i1amese trend toward increased ci vilian influence and parti -
cipation in government . 
"In short , it is not the precise form of organi zation or the 
precise choice of flow chart that i s important . 
What is i mpor-
tant is : 
"I. 
efforts ; 
An immediate 
and. 
and effective military screen for RD 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D:ue: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"2 . 
Authoritative and compelling administrati on of the 
ef£orts of civilian agencies . 
"I believe we can institute effective administration of 
t he RD program -- which Ambassador Lodge ~as aptly described 
as the heart of the matter - - achieving all of these i deals : 
"1. 
l-1aintain the effect and the appearance of civilian 
control by immediately ass i gning overall supervision of all 
RD activities to Ambassador Porter (and assigning a seco~d 
deputy to ArnbassB.dor Lodge to absorb the sUbstantial other 
responsibilities now met by Ambassador Porter) . 
"2. 
That the several civilian lines of command withi n 
agencies be consolidated. into one . 
Thus , USAID, JUSPAO, OSA., 
and the Embassy personnel assigned to RD all would continue 
Wlder the nominal administrative control of their respective 
agencies but full, unified ouerational control would rest 
solely with Ambassador Porter . 
"3. 
That Ambassador Porter I s authority be rne..de clear and 
full to eaCh constituent agency of the RD team, including: 
r elocation of personnel; 
t he establishment of priorities irrespective of 
agency priorities ; 
and the apportionment of the :funds allocated by 
each agency to Viet-Nam, bounded only by statutory 
l imitations . 
"4. 
That l·!A.CV immediately give highest-level command focus 
and consolida. tion to its RD concerns and staff, 
no~., that i t i s 
no longer so completely distracted from RD by the compelling 
r equirements of main force combat . 
Thi s would be organized, 
around the thesis that the central need i s the most effective 
persuasive pOue!" or leverage on RVIlAF. 
This thesis is strengthened 
substantially by : 
The f irm intent, expressed to us i~ Saigon last 
week, of President Thieu and Prime Z,1inister Ky 
to shift AR~l infantry to revolutionary develop-
ment work starting in January; 
The enhanced powers they intend to gi ve to General 
Thang, already an able chief·of RD for GVN. 
"5. 
That the !·t~cv ef!'ort embrace at least advisory control 
over all levels of force -- starting with ARVN but also includ-
ing RF, PF, eIW, 8..'1d the para-military operations of the RD 
cadre , PFF, and PRV. 
97 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
, 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~'1 Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"These steps would greatly strengthen both the military and 
civil lines of' command. 
They Hould contribute significantly 
to the success of RD. 
But not even these changes would be 
decisive without a strong link betl-reen them. 
"The civil side requires the cap9.city to influence mili-
tary movement which no organizational chart can provide . 
The 
MACV side r equires the political and sUbstantive expertise 
which a military organization does not -- and. is not expected 
to -- possess . 
"Thus the :f\mdamental recon:.mendation I would make i s : 
"6. 
To appoint , as principal d,eputy and executive officer 
to Av~assedor Porter , a general of the highest possible ability 
and stature -- of tv:o, three or even four-star rank . 
To do so 
would win the following advantages : 
"a . 
Compelling indication of the seriousness with 
which the Administration regards RD. 
"b . 
The rank, and stature t o insure optimum RD per-
f or mance from l·!ACV . 
"c. 
The ra..Tlk and stature to afford maximum imp'2ct 
on GVN military leaders and capacity to persuade them properly 
to prod RVNAF ... ,hen necessary. 
"d. 
Demonstrated command administrative capacities 
with which to assist Ambassador Porter , while bridging the 
i nevitable institutional difficulties that might well other-
wise develop from one arm of HA.CV I S taking orders trom a 
civilian . 
lie . 
A solution to the military control image problem, 
by which the advantages of close military support l'lOuld be 
vei led by civilian control . 
"f . 
The capacity and positi on to f or mulate an effec-
tive qualitative plan enconpassing both military and civil 
r ealiti es . 
Previous plans have focused on numbers of provinces, 
volume of RD cadre tx·ained., and so on . 
They ha.ve put an Wl-
r ealistic pr:emium on quantitative, '1statisti cal" success . 
Meaningful ~riteria , hm-iever , must be qua1.itative. 
I would 
enV1S10n such a quali tative plan i ntended to cover at least 
t he next 12 months . 
"There would be an additional prospective advantage as 
well . If it should later be fOWld that dual lines of authority 
even given this strong l i nk -- arc not successfUl , t hen we could 
more readily fall back to a unitary, militar y cOrnFwand structur e - -
with the new RD general taking charge . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD DMc: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"He would have the benefit, in that situation, of having 
been under civilian control and his relationship to RD would 
already be evident, making the change to military control less 
abrupt and less susceptible to criticism. n W 
Secretary l-icrIarnara ' s memorandum - - sent the day before Katzenbach ' s --
was of greater importance, and stands out as one of the most far-reaching 
and thoughtful documents in the files . 
Hhile this study concentrates on 
pacification, i t is necessary to view McNamara ' s remarks about pacifica-
tion in this memorandum within the context of the entire paper . 
He said that the military situation had gone "some\o1hat better" than 
he had anticipated a year earlier, and that "we have by and large blunted 
the communist military initiative . " 
But he found little cause for hope 
that the overall situation would turn dramatically in our favor within the 
next t\'10 years . 
"I see no r easonable way to bring the war to an end soon," 
he said, and described the enemy strategy as one of "keeping us busy and 
waiting us out (a strategy of attriting our national will) ." 
"Pacification is a basic disappointment . 
He have good 
grounds to be pleased by the recent elections, by Ky ' s 16 
months in power ) and by the faint signs of development of 
national political institutions and of a legitimate civil 
government. 
But none of this has translated itself into 
political achievements at Province level or belovT . 
Paci-
fication has) if anything, gone backward •.. " 
Thus, the Secretary found us "no better, and if anything worse off - - from 
the point of view of the important "far (for the complicity of the people) . II 
He did not think at that time that m~jor increases in U. S. force levels 
or bombing programs would make a big difference in the short run . 
Rather , 
he suggested a series of actions designed to emphasize to Hanoi that we 
were setting definite limits on the cost in men and money of the "tar, while 
settling down for the long haul - - "a posture that makes trying to 'wait 
us out I less attractive ." His strategy was "five-pronged." 
First) he suggested, that we stabilize U.S. force levels in Vietnam, 
"barri ,a drar-..atic chan e in the ,,'ar . to 
The limit he proposed was the 
70,000 total then under consideration . 
(CINCPAC had requested 570,000 
by end 1967) . 
This limit \lould "put us in a positiqn \'There negotiati ons 
would be more likely to be productive , but if they were not we could pur-
sue the all-important pacification task with proper attention and resources 
and without the spectre of' apparently endless escalation of U. S. deploy-
ments . " 
Second, he reco::nmended a barrier near the IY.1Z and "across the trails 
of LaOs ." 
Third) he suggested that we "stabilize the Rolling Thunder nrogram 
against the North. " 
He thus recoI!ll'l1ended against the increase in the l evel 
99 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
of bombing end the broader target systems that the JCS was then requesting . 
Again, his reason was to "rer.love the prospect of ever-esce.lating bombing 
as a factor complicating our political posture and distracting from the 
main job of pacification in South Vietnam. " 
Fourth, he said, we should "pursue a Vigorous -cacification "program. " 
"The large-unit opere.tions war , which we kncr,., best how t o 
fight and \-There He have had our successes , is largely irrele-
vant to pacification as long as we do not lose i t . 
By and 
large, the people in rural areas believe that the GVN when 
it comes will not stay but that the VC will; that coopera-
tion ,'lith the GVN will be punished by the VC ; that the GVN 
i s really indifferent to the people ' s welfare ; that the low-
level GVN are tools of the local rich ; and that the GV1'l is 
ridden with corruption. 
"Success in pacification depends on the interrelated 
functions of providing physical security, destroying the 
VC apparatus, motivating tbe people to cooperate, and estab-
lishing responsive local government . 
An obviously necessa.ry 
but not sufficient requirement for success of the RD cadre 
and police is vigorously conducted and adequately prolonged 
clearing operations by military troops who will ' stay ' in 
the area, who behave thenselves decently andwbo sbow re-
spect for the people . 
"This elemental requirement of pacii'ication has been 
missing. 
In almost no contested area d.esignated. for paci-
fication in recent years have ARVN forces actually ' cleared 
and ste.yed' to a point where cadre teams, if available) could 
have stayed overnight in hamlets and survived, let alone 
accomplish their mission .•• 
fl Now that the threat of a communist main- i'orce mili-
tary victory has been thwarted by ow: emergency efforts , 
. we must allocate far more attention and a portion of the 
regular military forces (at least hali' of ARVN and perhaps 
a portion of the U. S. forces) to the task of providing an 
active and per~anent security system behind which the RD 
teams and police can operate and behind which the political 
struggle with the VC infrastructure can take place . 
liThe U.S. cannot do this pacification security job for 
the Vietnamese . All we can do is 'massage the heart.' For 
one reason, it is kn<Y.m that we do not intend to stay; i f 
our efforts worked at all; it would merely postpone the 
eventual confrontation of the VC and GVIl i nfrastructures . 
The GVI{ tlust do the job, and. I am convinced that drastic 
reform is needed if the GVN is going to be able to do it . 
100 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD D:ue: 2011 
TOP S2CRET - SenGitive 
liThe fir:t essential ref'orm is in the attitude 01' GVN 
officials . 
racy erc generally arsthetic , and there is 
corruption high and low. 
Often appointm~nts, prorrotions, 
and draft deferments must be bought; and. kickbacks on sala-
r ies are COT"'"lon . 
Cadre at the bottom CE'.n be no b etter than 
the syste~ above them . 
UThe second needed reform is in the attitude and con-
duct of the A}{VN, 
The irea.ge of the goverllr.!cnt cannot im-
prove Wlless and until the ARVN improves markedly . 
They 
do not understa.'ld the importance (or respectability ) of 
~clfic~tion nor the iL~rten~e to pacification of proper, 
disciplined conduct. 
PrO:lotion~ , assignr..cnts and alfards 
arc often not !!lade on merit , but ra.ther on the basis of 
h~wlDg a diploma , friends , or rels.tives ) or because of 
bribery . 
'The ARVN is weak. in dedication, directi on and. 
di scipline. 
"Not crou~h ARVN are devoted to area and population 
security, a,nd. llhcn the ARVIl does attempt to support }>:lci-
i'ico.tion, their actiolls do not Inst long cnoueh; their tac-
tics are b<!.d decpite U.S, prodding (no aggressi ve SJL:l,ll- uni t 
satUl'ati on 1 !.trolling, haulet searches, quick-reaction contact , 
or offensi ve nic;ht amlmshes) ; t.hey do not 1il[-..l-;.c good use of' 
i nt(:ll igcncc; and their leadership and discipline are bad , 
"Fu.rtherI:i.ore , i t is my conviction th'lt a part of' the 
problem undoubtedly lies in ba.d n'~n"'.zel:ilent on the Atlcri ct'.U 
as well as the GVn si de . 
Here split responsibility -- or 
' no responslbility ' -- bas resulted in too l i ttle ha.rd press-
ure on the GVN to do i ts j ob and no really solid or realis -
tic ple.nning wi th respect to the whole effort . 
He must 
deal ,-lith this I!V).ru:.gcmcnt problem now and deal wi th i t 
effectively. 
"One solution tiould be to consolidate all U. S. activi-
t ies '.;111ch (;.j."C pric.:.e.rily part of the civilian pacification 
program and. all persons engaGed in such act.iviti es , provid-
i ng a clee.r assignnsnt of res~onsibility and_ a unif'ied com-
mand \ulder a civllil".!l re.l;i.0v,:dof all other duties . 
(If 
thin task is assigned to Ar".bassadol' Porter , another incU-
vidual Dust be sent illl. ~diately to Saigon to serve as Am-
bast..s,dor Lod;:;c ' s deputy . ) 
Under this appro!'.ch, t here v:ould 
b e e. cal'efully delineated div5sion of responsibility bet"leen 
the civi li'ln-in-charge and. an elct:lcnt ot' Co;.WS!.tI\CV under 
a t:cnior ofi'ic~r , \-.'ho ,'lOuld give the subject of plannine 
for R..'1d providing hamlet security the higbc"t pri ority i n 
attention r..rl.'ll'E;sources . 
Success ,-;ill depend on thc'mcn 
select .d fol' the jobs on both sides (they l!!ust be e.t:long 
the hiOlcSt r~,nk and most competent administrators i n the 
U. S. Govt:l'! 
~ nt), on complet.c coop"':!ation among the U. S . 
101 
TOP SECH~T -
Se~~it ive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D:ue: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
f:leocnts, and on the eo tent to which the South Vietnaoese 
can be shocked out of' their present p:!.ttern of behavior . 
The first work of this reorganized, U. S. pacification organi-
zation should. be to produce ,'ithin 60 days Et. realistic and 
detailed plan for the cOming ye~r
. 
"From the political [;.nd public- rela.tions vievrpoint , 
this solution is preferable -- if it 'darks. 
But vie cannot 
t olel'ate continued i'ailure . 
If' it fails after a fair trial , 
the only alternatiVe jn my vieH is to place the entire paci-
fication prograo -- civilian and military -- uneer General 
l1cstlT..oreland. 
Tnis alternative .. rauld result in the estab-
lishrt.ent of a Deputy COi·1Jfr,J\CV for Pacification l,oiho ,,[auld 
be i n comrn.:tnd of all pacification .statTs i n Saigon and of 
all pacification staffs and activities in the field; one 
person in ench corps, province and district Hould be re-
sponsible for the U.S. effort. n 
"(It should be noted that progress in po,cii'ico.tion, more than 
anything else, \-rill persu~de the eneny to nec;otiat.e or ,dth-
draw . )l1 
Fifth, the Secretary recommended a renerred cff'ort to get negotiations 
started, by taking steps "to increase Otu· credibilityB ... rith Hanoi , by 
considering a shif't in the pattern at au!' bOr.lbiq; program considering 
t he pos:.ibility of cessation of borr.binc;, by trying to l1split the VC oIT. 
from Hanol, H and by "developinti a rc'alistic plan providing a role for 
t he VC in negotiations , post ... ,ar life, and government of the nution. II 
His sUlllillB.tion ... ras somber . 
\'1hile repeating his prediction that the 
next tiiO years rrould not see a satisfactory conclusion by either large-
unit action or negotiations, r·lci~a:r.a.ra advocated pursuing both routes al-
though ",,'e should recognize that succeSs from them is a J:lere possibility, 
not a probability." 
liThe solution lies in girding, openly, for e. longer 
... ,ar and in taking actions :i.J:nm.ediately \'rhich ... rill in 12 to 
18 months give clear evidence that the continuing costs and 
risks to the American people are acceptably limited, that 
the formula 1'01' success has been 1'ound, and that the end of' 
the war is merely a matter of tine . All of Illy recorr._';),cnda.-
tions vill contribute to this str~tcg:lr , but the cne most 
difficult to it'!plement is perhaps the £'.ost inporta...'1t one --
enlivening the pacification progl·a~ . 
The odds are le~s than 
even for this ta.:;k, if only because He have failed so con-
sistently since 1961 to m.:!ke a dent in the problem. 
But, 
bec"use: the 1907 trend of' pacification \ti1l, I believe, be 
the lli3.in talisr:a.n of' ult.i..m~te U. S, success or failure i n 
Vict.n:l!:i, 
extrr~ordip..ary imagination and effort sJlOuld go 
into crAnging the stripes of that problem . 
102 
TOP SECRtT -
Sen~itive 
• 
Ky : 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~'1 Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRRl - Sensitive 
The me.:norandwn closed Hith a cot:1mcnt on the thoughts of Tbieu and 
"They told me that they do not expect the enemy to nego-
tiate or to modif'y his program in less th .... n two years . 
Rather , 
t hey expcct the enemy to continue to expand end to increase 
his activity. 
They expressed agreement l1ith us that the key 
to SUCCCGS is pacification and that so far pacification bas 
failed . 
They agree that t·:e nr:ed clarification of G'nf and 
U. S. roles E'.nd that the bulk of' the ARVN should be shifted 
to p<!.cification . 
Ky \Till, betw~cn January and July 1967, 
shift n..ll AR\ftl ini'antry divisions to th!lt role . 
And he is 
giving Th3.ng , a good Revolutionary Development director , 
added pO'liors . 
Thieu and. Ky see this as part of a tvlo-year 
(J.967-1968) schedule, in uhich of:fensive operations age.inst 
enemy n:'lin force units are contil!ued, carried on prim~rily 
by the U, S. and other Free Horld forces . 
At the end of the 
hlo-yca.r period, they believe the enemy may be 'rilling to 
neeotiate or to retreat from his current course of' action.1! }:Jj 
MCNamara ' s memorandum n:3.I'ked a strong nC::il emphl'.sis on po.cii'i cation 
by hlI:l, and the ripples that this new emphasis set off \1el'e inevitably 
to sl?rcad tlu'oughout the USG, changir,g et11'';'\::1is and oiTiciaJ. rhetoric up 
and dO"..;l1 the line . 
His firs t reactio:J.s \.ere officj al : 
comments on his 
mc:more.ncllu"l. fron GeorGe Cal'ver , Heks' 
Speci,<>~l Assistant for VietllatleSe 
Afrairs at the CIA; and frent the JCS , 
Carver agreed '-lith the evaluation 
of the situation, but objected to sc~e of the recom .. '!lE.:nded actions , po.rticu-
laxly the Hpress for ncgotic.tlonsl! iteI!ls Hhich he felt \.;auld be "counter-
productive . " 
Carver t:'<tde the provocative statement that he considered 
the prognosis "too gloomy. " 
If the odds for enlivcning thc pa.cii'ication 
pl'ogra.'ll arc indeed "less than even, present U. S. objectives in Vietnam 
are not likely to be achieved. I! 
In his memor andum, Ce.rver took issue \lith loicNanw.ra on pac:i.i'i cation . 
Carver felt that "despite the errors and adninistrati ve l:eakoesses of present 
prOgl·a.ms, in the concept of HD we be.ve found the right forrmla, a catalyst 
that is potentially ca~~ble of inspiring the Vietna~ese into eff'cctive 
action .•. Serious and SyStCIll?tic effort in this field i s really a post-
Honolulu Coni'ere:nce developrient and i t \'lould be unrea.li stic to expect 
draL";:J.tic, readily quo.ntifie..ble progress i n the short span of eight months . II 
Carvel' supported the neVI stress on pacification, adding that he \.,ould 
support '\lholeheartedly" a Ureal reorc:anizational change under which the 
civilian cirect0r "auld have e.. joint staff of sufficient scope to cnal)le 
him to plan, control, and dir~ct tbe U.S. effort end have operational con-
trol over all -- not just civilian -- elements engs.ced in RD . .. II 
He opposed 
a uc:.aref\lJ.ly delir,l<lted division between the civilian i n charge e.nd. n.n elE:-
Dent of CO!US:::ACY under a senior officer . II 
"A civilian pacification structure cannot be given a ' fair trial ' unless 
the civili~'n director has the necesl:iary authority, II Carver said. 
IIAlso, the 
103 
TOP SBCR~~ -
Sen~itive 
• 
Dcclas.<iificd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRBT - Sensiti ve 
trie.l will not be fair if n:ajor quantifiable results al'e anticipated. in 
a matter of'months . 1I 
Cal'vcr ' s vision of p9.cii'ication rested to a l arge degree on the idea 
oi' gaining the active sup,ort of the populati0~ . 
He seemed opposed to the 
use of troops to r;,:rely protect terrain and the people ,>'1l0 l i ved on i t , 
saying, "If an attempt i s r:::lde to ir.rpose pacification on an unengaged popu-
le.ce by GVU or U. S . mi litary force{; , that attempt ..... i ll fail. n 
He concluded , as he had begun: 
"He agree "ith Secretary r·1cHamara ' s prognosi s that there 
i s little hope for a satisfactory conclusion of the \lar wi th-
in the next tuo years . 
He do not agree that "the odds are 
l ess than even" for en.livenir:g the Jacificc.tion program. 
If this 'Here true , the U. S. would be fool ish to continue the 
struggle i n Vietn~ and should seek to disengage as fast as 
possible . 
He think tha.t if 'Fe cstabliRh adequate tr.am.tgement 
and control on the U. S. side and ensure that the Vietnamese 
follOl-T thrOUGh on r edirecting their mili tary resources as 
pronised, there are at least fail' prospects for substantial 
pl'ogress in ~cification over the next t'l'lO years ." W 
The JCS revie',,' of l:cl~a.I:iS.ra ' s ncmcranilil.'Il Has far more severe . 
Hhi le 
agreeing that "There i s no reason to expact that the " .. !O.r can be brought 
s oon to a successful conclusion, n the Chiefs ca.de e, strong case, as usual , 
for increa~cd bombing , no predete:rmined force ceilings , and stated scvt::ral 
t imes in difi'erent ',mys that the \.'cx 'I:&S going very well i ndeed - - a lthough 
t his same -point hed. been made by lIcHamara . 
The Chief s also disagreed s t rongly 
\'lith the nove fOr negot.iations i-."hich 1,1cNaJriara had suggested . 
Any bombillg 
pause , they said, Hould be regarded by Ha.noi, by the GVrI , and by our All i cr.; , 
a s "renc'.;ed. evidence of lack of U. S. determination to press the war t o 
a successful conclus i on. II 
On pacification, the JCS "adhered to their cOl1clusion" t hat "to achi eve 
opti mum effect1v(;ness , thc pacificc.ti on progran should be transferred to 
cO;:aS:ACV . 
Houever , if' for political r easons a civilif'.u t ype organi zation 
should be considered. mandator y by the Pres i dent, tbey would i nterpose no 
obj ecti on . 
"Uevertheless , t.hey are not sanguine that an effectlve 
civilian- type organization can be erected, i f at all, except 
at the expense of costly delays . 
As to the use of a substan-
tial fractiC'n of ARV!; for pacification purposes , t he JCS 
concur . 
He-,fever , they desire to flag that adoption of' thi s 
conce-ot \.fill lL'1d.oubtedly elicit charges of aU . S. takeover 
of co~lbat Cpcl'stions at incrt:ased cost i n Ar.terican casualti es . II !:t2J 
The JCS requested. tht'.t their ViCilS be brought t o the attention of the 
President . 
TOP SECRF.T - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~' 1 Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Scnsitive 
On the record, Secret;..ry l·;cllam3.ra. and Under Secretary Kat:~enbach had 
been quite fre.nk in tell:ing the AIuel'ican public that they had found :p3.ci-
f'icatioll lagging during their October trip to Vietnam. 
Katzenbach said 
he \·;as "concerned" and, ll.fter coerging frc,m the meeting: with the President, 
told the \','hite House prE'ss corps that I1He have to do a good deal more to 
get the ' other ,",,'l.I" 
moving and I think "Te can . " 29./ 
Even Komer , "'ho remainl;d 
more optj.mistic than lkHar;:ara and Kat.zenbach , was quoted as "acknoHledgi ng" 
that -pacificatioH ",e.s lagging. 
Hhilc "military progress has exceeded our expectations ," the Defense 
Secretary sa.id, 'Progress in pacification has "been very 810\·! indeed." His 
tl'ip abo raised fears, for the first time , jn Saigon that the military 
\.,ould tc:.l:e over th"! I!'..cif·ication effort . 
Thus, at almost the very moment 
that the President was hearing Kat.zc:nbach ' s recommendation that the civi l i Ems 
be reorganized and given a last chance (see previous action ), Hard. Just 
.:2.S '<Triting from Saigon: 
"l,!cNarr.a.ra left behind tbe impression that his visit to 
South Vietnam le.st week marked the beginni ng of the end of 
civilie.n suprc!!lacy itl the American effort . ,. 
"Sources here Her0 saying today thnt rrcN':l.I:Iara, a sti ckler 
for detail, \HlS uni.r:1pressed Hi th civilian deScl'iptions of 
~rogress, or luck of it, in the pacification effort . 
The 
A.I::lerican ,,;ho bears J:lost of the a.uthority for that , Dep'.lty 
Amb~,sml.do;t' lj'/illlwn C. Porter, "7as in the U. S, during the 
McNamal:e v:i.si t . 
"There has always been, as one official here put it, a 
' milit~ry compOnent ' to pacification . 
But it is understood 
now that that component vill be increased and the mill tary 
will more and more take control of pacificati on - - t he task 
called. nation-buildinG;' 
" . . • The other likely outcome of HcNamara ' s four days i n 
Vietnam is that the role of ARVn ttill change . 
"Informed sources said that MC!:9.n'l.ra heard no complaints 
whatsoever from Arnerice.u military sources regarding t he pel'-
forrre..nce of the ARVU, but the fact is that he did. 
It he.s 
been fm open 8ecret in Saigon that the role of the ARVn ifould 
che.nge next year . 
Their ,",ork "lould be in pacificati on, not 
i n striking at rno.tn force Wli ts , .. 
"There is nrn., increa.sed cerw.inty that the war effort 
de.spi te public homage to the ' other lIar ' llnd the ' hearts and 
mind!'; of the people ' is more thoroughly mili tary than ever --
and morc thoroughly Americfl.n . 
"In t.he end, the military io thought to ha.ve carried the 
day not by force or logic or force of Hisdom, although their 
105 
TOP SECRE.T - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
position here can be argued plausibly with both ~ogic and wisdom, 
but by sheer \':eight of' ",hat one offich.l called the juggernaut ... 
II IHestmoreland says do this, do tha.t, and soroethine happens, I 
one informEi observer said. 
'Hhen Lodge says do this , do that, 
sn~etimes something happens, and sometimes it doesn ' t happen . I 
lIThe men here 'who "anted to see one ideology beaten by a 
better onc, to see the Vietnamese character (not to mention the 
cOlUltry;;fde) preserved and not submerged by the '~ru.', "rho Vie\'led 
the struggle as an exercise in counterinsurgency, have now cer-
tainly lost ... 
lilt rC"!mt'.ins to be seen whether the problens of Vietnam lend 
themselves to military solutions and "ihether changing conditions 
in this "'OJ.' arc better handled by colonels than diplomats . II W 
Just I s EI,·ticle was VITong, of course, since the decision to give l-1ACV 
rcsponsibilit~.r :for pacification had not been madc . 
Tndeed, ,·:ithin a fell 
dey::; this fact had. also leaked to the press, and stories in the NC"\·, York 
Times, datelined Saigon, spoke of the 11 abortive ef'fort ll by j·:A.CV to take 
over the effort . 
But the importance of' the stories was not in their 
accuracy or inaccuracy, but in the fact that they indicatcd the emotions 
that had becn raised by the subj ect dUl.'ing and after the 14clJamara-
Katzenbnch-Ko l~r visit. In truth, no one in Saieon, not even Lodge and 
\')cstlZlorclund, knew at this titlle \/hnt the final decision wn::; to be. 
But 
the subject was up for discussion, and the pressure from \~ashington had 
been measurably increased . 
\'lith the llclTamara and Katzenbach mcmoranda in hand, the President 
apparently indicated tentative agre~ents to give the civiliens a short 
trial period. to get pacification moving. 
Then he left for his Asian tour , 
, ... hich \las to cliMax with the Seven-l:ation Conference at l·:anila. 
He left 
behind him instructions to prepare a Eessage to Lodge and Porter and 
HestlJioreland, instructing them in his decision . 
Since the message .... :as 
drafted and sent on to the President in VI ellington on October 18, before 
l.:unila, but not sent on to Lode;e and Porter in Saigon until NOVelilber 4 , 
af't,er J.1anila., there apparently remained some uncertainty as to his decision , 
which .... ·as not clarified until most of the principal::. were united briefly 
in j,lanila. 
But this i s of marginal .ir!!.portance. 
The f'nct lIas that the: 
President had approved the idea of' giving the civiliuns a final chance . 
The Cable Exchange : 
Lovember , 1966 
By October 18 , 1,1c1{amara, Katzenbach, and Komer had an agreed-upon 
tclegrllr.) for the President to send Lodge. It was fOI'warded to Hellington, 
~hcre the Precident had begun his Asian tour : 
rrState/Defense and KODer recor:uncnd your concurrence in 
the g.eneral. plan recor.Il';).ended by both Secretary llcllamara and 
106 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Dcclas.<iificd per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Under Sccl"ct:1ry ¥.atzenb~ch rcgardlng reorgani?.ation on the 
AClerica.n side of' the administ:r-f'.tion of' ihe Revolutionary 
Developocnt (RD) program in Viet- I:B:.1. 
\'le therefore recom-
mend that you approve our sending the followinC State-Defense 
nessage to A~bassador Lod6c: 
BIDlH TF.x'r 
ttPersono.l For Lodge . 
You hn.vc described. the RD pl'ogrrun. 
as the h,..art of' the matter in SVN . 
He agree . 
Also, you hs.ve 
reported and 'ole agree that progress in the RD program so far 
hus been slight and unsatisfactory. 
\ole all agree the.t progress 
must be f.1~de in this crucial hl'ea if' the war is to be won in 
the South and if the ]forth is to be persuaded to negotiate . 
It is clear to us that some organizational changes are required 
on the Am';ricall side to get RD moving -- to bring harder press-
ure on the GV1r to do its job and to get solid and realistic 
planu:!.n,3 '<lith respect to the Hhole e:ffort . 
"He hnd considered putting the entire progl"a.m under CONUS:1O\CV 
to achieve these ends; and this tns.y ultimately prove to be the 
best solution. 
But recognizing certain objections to this 
approach, 'vie arc prep:!.rcd to try a solution which leaves the 
civilian .fUnctions Wlder civilie.n l!',3.nfJ.ger:l.ent. 
As we see it, 
the tric.l organization Viould involve the f'ollmdng changes : 
"1. 
The several civilian lines of' cOllll!'3.nd within U.S . 
agencies \lould, be consolidated into one . 
Thus, line responsi -
bility f'or all personnel assigned to RD civilian functions ,wuld 
rest solely with one high-ranking civilian . 
(I'le preswne this 
man would be An.basss..d.or Porter , If so, he would have to be 
relieved of all other duties, and you would have to have another 
deputy assigned to absorb the substantial other responSibili-
ties nOH met by A.r.tbassador Porter , ) 
The authority o:f this 
civilian ",ould be £lQ.de clear and full to each constituent agen-
cy of the civilian RD team, including relocation of personnel, 
the establishr:lcnt of priorities irrespective of agency priori-
ties, and the apportionment of the funds allocated for RD by 
each agency to Viet-Nam (bounded only by statutory limitations). 
112 , 
To strengthen Porter administratively, ·it might. be 
well to assign hi~ a competent Principal Deputy and Executive 
Officer -- a military officer of t'fO or three-star l'ank , 
If' 
t.his cfficcr is desired, General \·iest::1.ore] and can supply hia 
or, if he requ(!sts, the of'f'icer can be provided from here . 
This officer l;ould not be to comm~nd U,S . military f'orces or 
operations or to perform l·.i\CV's functions of' advising and prod-
ding th,:, AR'ni', but Houl.d be to provide ad.:ninistrativ-.: strength 
on the ci vili.?n side and to serve as a bridge to J·;ACV, ensur-
ing efficient interf~.cc bet·.{cc:n the civilian and military 
structures . 
l 07 
TOP SEenEI' - Sensjtive 
• 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~'1 Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"3 . 
He understand General llcstmOl'eland is already considering 
a HACV Special Assistant for Pacification or a Deputy for Paci-
fication . 
He presume that the appoint.!!lent of such a Special 
Assistant or Deputy could be timed to coincide with the changes 
on the civilian side, I!'.'lking pOssible the highest-level command 
:focus end consolidation to MACV ' s RD concerns and staff. 
"4 . 
Careful definition and delineation of responsibili-
tie~ of the U. S. civilian ancl U.S. mlitary sides ~iould be 
neces$E'.ry in the whole RD establishment in South Viet-Nam to 
ensure that nothing falls bet~/ecn the stools and that the tHO 
e~forts fUlly mesh . 
1I\'le are most anxious, as ",e knou you are ) to make progress 
in RD . 
So this new organizational arrangement \-/ould be on 
tri al for 9O-l20 days, at the end of "lbich we \1ould take stock 
of pl'ogress and reconsider 'l'lhether to assign all r esponsibility 
for RD to CO~,:USi·lACV . IT 2Y 
As meni-ioned above , this eable: \-,as not repeated to Saieen until after 
the 1,:.:>.niJ1l.. Coni'erenee . 
PJ.·eRumably, in the intervening period, the PJ.'esident 
had had n chance to talk directly to Lodge and. ~'Testmol'eland about the matte!- , 
since they were both at 1.:.e.nilo. (Porter Has not) , 
In addition, Komer had 
gone from i·~· ,nila baek to Saigon for e. \·:eek · s stay , and had given Porter a 
clear we.rnin3 that the rcorgamze:Lion .. ;as impending. 
Hhen he left, Komer 
left behind two nlCInbers of hi's staff to assist Porter "fith the planning 
for the r corganization, although Porter and Lodgc , for some r eason not 
clea.r today, still seemed doubtful that the reorganization Hashington lias 
prc!'>sing on them .. :as r eally nece::;snry, and really desired by the President . 
The cable --
uncha~ed from the text cited above -- D.l'l,ived in Vietnam 
on I!ovember 1(, 1.966. 2J/ 
It was slugged lILiterally E;yes Only for Ambe.SSf'.-
dol' from Secretary, SecDef, and Komer," and because Lodge decided to inter-
p:tet thn.t slug line literally, the entir e process \\las clclaycd one week --
a sorry spectacle and ~·'holly unneces~ary on all counts . 
t·nlen Lodge answ'ered 
the cable by requesting peroission to discuss it with his assistants , there 
was E'.n understandable suspicion in \1ashington that he was simply doine so 
to delay action a little ",hile l one;er . 
But on the other hand, the cable 
had received the highest slug norJrally availD.ble to State Department mes -
sages - - "Literally Eyes Only" -- and Lodge· could sey truthfully that he 
wa.s just :follml'ing instruction. 
In any event) L.adge sent bis answer to ";ashington November 6 : 
"I t'.gree thf'.t proc;ress has been • slight and unsf'.tisfnc -
tory ' and , undoubtedly some organizational changes can be 
helpful . 
l:Im:evcr, before cO::l.'Uenting on that I Hould like 
to set "ut sone basi c considerations . 
"Crux of the problem is not defective organization . 
It 
is security. Civilian reorganization can affect progress only 
108 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD DMc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
indirectly, because security will remain outside civilian 
purviell . , • 
liTo meet this need we must make u;,ore U. S. troops available 
to help out in pacification operations ar, we move to concen-
trate ARVi'f effort in this "fork. 
U. S. forces would be the 
catalyst; ",ould lead by exe.I:1ple; and iofOuld ",ork ",i th the 
VietnS!::.ese on the 'buddy ' system . 
They "lould be the 10 per-
cent of the total force of men under ar~ (90 percent of whon 
\'TouJd be Vietnamese) \I"hich il"ould get the whole thing moving 
faster . 
I1This has been done on a small scale already by elements 
of the U. S. J·!a.rines, 1st and 25th U. S. Infantry Divisions , 
and the KOl'cans . 
He tbink it can be made t o work and the 
cains unde'l' such a program, '\lhile not flashy, would hopefully 
be solid. 
Everything depends on whether we can change ARVN 
h&.bits. 
Experiments already road_~ indicate that U . S, casual-
t i es would be feu . 
Uhilc it .{auld take time , it \-:ould be 
clear to everyone at home that time \-las working for us and it 
might create a ' smell of victory . I 
It would eventually get 
at Viet Cong recruiting -- surely an achieveI:lcnt ",bicb would 
fundamentally affect the course of the \'lar . 
"I wonder ",hcther the above result could not be achieved 
if the phrase ' offensive operations' were to be redefined so 
that instead of defining it as J:l.eaning ' seck out and destroy, I 
which I understand is no~: the ca.se, it \'lould be defined as 
' split up the Viet Cong and keep him orr balance . ' 
"This new definition of the plu'ase ' offensive operations ' 
would rr.ean fewer men for the purely ' military war , fewer U.S. 
casualties and more pacification . 
lilt ,,:ouJ.d also hasten the revamping of the ARVN, ",hieh 
Ky says is now due to have been completed by normal Vietnamese 
bureaucratic nethods by July 1967 (",hieh seel:lS optimistic to' 
me) . 
What I propose in this telegram would in effect revamp 
the ARVIl by ' on-the- job-training . I 
It is the only way th?t 
I can think of drasti cally to accelerate the present pace . 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
"The qu~stion of transferrIng Revolutionary Development 
civilian functions t.e cm·l,ls:,tI1.CV raises questions and I under-
sta.nd you recognize certain objections . 
I doubt whether it 
would solve 8..'1Y e.xisting problc'l1s , and it \Iould certainly 
erl:;ate many new ones. 
I agree with your second paro.graph 
in vl1i<:;h you say chilian :functions should be left under 
civilian I.:.':l.llace:ment . 
. 109 
TOP RECFEr - Sensitive 
Declassified per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Projc~'1 Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"I agree th~t civilian lines of cOInl"'~nd "rithin U, S. 
agencies dealing with Revolutionary Develo:p."nent should be 
consolidated under Amb5ssador Porter . 
He should take unto 
htmsclf the direct operation of the five categories of rn&n-
po"ler nCJtl i n the field . 
I refer to USA.ID public sE'~fety, 
Ua~ID province reps ; JUGPAOj CIA and the civil fUnctions 
performed by the military advisers . 
They would all stay 
exactly where they arc as far as rationing , housing and 
administration is concerned . 
Porter ..,ould have the opera-
tional authol'ity and responsibility . 
"I am not clear \,hat another Deputy Ambassador ,-,ould 
do and advise against such an unnecessary and umdeldy struc-
ture . 
Ambassador Porter does not nOH absorb r substantial 
other responsibilities ' ,;;hich distract his attention !'rom 
r evolutio!lary develop:nent. 
Administrative r.lB.tters involving 
the U. S. Bission as a >';hole are handled by the t·Iission Co-
ordinator, arld political affairs arc handled by me with close 
support from the political cOQt).se-lor . 
Economic af:('airs , in 
which Porter as the r:.:ln responsible for rE!volutionary develop-
ment is intindtely and necessarily involved, are well covered 
by AID and the Economic Counselor . 
Public affairs not con-
nected \.-ith field operations associated ~.;ith revolutionary 
development are well in hand and do not take Ambassador Porter ' s 
time . 
tlThe only 1 substantial other responsibility 1 ",hicb Porter 
carries outside of RD, i s to take charge in J:Jy absence . 
I 
see no need, and \yould_ find it most inappropriate , for this 
to b e changed. 
"I think there is great r:l~rit in the idea of havine a 
high- ranking military ~~n involved_ in pacification work . 
He should be in charge o:f all the nilito.ry aspects 0:(' paci-
fication -- rrorking uith AHVU and selecting, e)"l'editing , and 
assigning the U. S. tl'OOPS ""ho would opel'ate as sugge~ted in 
p.:<.re. 3 above . 
He should be an officer ",ith proper knCJv,ledge 
of and talent fOr the subject and I , of course, think of 
General Heyand. 
If the decision is made by all hands to 
put the military i nto ~~cification as suggested in para 3 , 
t he decision as to "ihere to place such a general should not 
be too difficult . 
111 agree that c:aref'ul definition and celineation of r e-
sponsibilitieG of the U.S . civilian and m.:..litary sid_es i s 
necessary . 
He intend. that the two ef forts fully mesh . 
lIClearl~" there i s very little that can be done econorLically, 
socially, psycholoCically, 8...'1d politically for the ' hearts and 
mindR' of men, if these llien h~ve knives stickirie into their 
collectiv,; bellies . 
The knife T.lust first be removed . 
It is 
llO 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
not the case -- as has so o£ten been said - - of whicb came 
first, the hen or the egg . .. 
* 
-. 
* 
<-
-x-
"This i s obviously not reflected in our present oreanizat.ion 
under \fhich, nonetheless , much has been accomplished . 
vlben 
l·:ac Bundy told me in February, after the Vi ce President ' s visit, 
of the decision to relieve Pbrter of all of his duties as Deputy 
(except that of being Charge d 'Af.faires in case of my absence ) 
50 that he could take charge of the civilian aspects of pa.ci -
f i cation, I did not at first l1elcome the idea. 
I must , hOi1'ever , 
recognize that under Porter a real asset has been built . 
"To sun up , therefore, the first priority is more U.S . 
troops to be allotted to pacification as set forth in ~ragraph 
3; the second priority is better operation and tightcn:lng up 
of the present organization; thirdly, are organizational changes . 
"Considering that your message \{as "EYES ONLY, II I request 
authority to discuss it and cy comments and plans with the 
heads of thc different I-lission agencies involved here . 
Vie 
ru:e all anxi ous to nl.,.<!.ke progress in RD, and the effort \-,i11 
i nvolve all of llS . 
It requires security and time . 
\-1hatever 
the trial period may be , I suggest '·,e maintain a constant 
taking stock of progress and of problcrls . 
Lodge ." 2!Y 
Back came '-!e.shington ' s MSHer on Uovember l2, giving Lodge permission 
to discuss the matter and sho\,T the cables to Porter , Hestmoreland, and 
"once plans mature , inform ncmbers l·tiss i on Council." 
Hit.h the civilians 
i n Hashington already feeling that their trial period was und.er-iay, they 
sought to get the 1-1ission moving faster to reorganize . 
The cables bcce.me 
a series of hints and threats and detailed guidance . 
The difficulty in 
comm1.Ulication ,;;as quite high . 
Thus , the Uovember 12 cable, drafted by 
Al'1ba.s~ador Unger and cleared with HcNanara , Helms , Gaud, Komer , Marks , 
Kat zcnbach , and Rusk, and slugged "for Ambassador :from Secretary, SecDef, 
atld iComer," laid out for Lodge and Porter a detailed description of hm·, 
the new structure: should look -- although everyone knew that the plans 
had already been dl'aHn up an.d were sitting on Lodge and Porter ' s desks 
in Sai gon -- and began with this y,·a..rni ng-hint : 
"Following steps need to be taken promptly if we are , in 
the time available , to give adequ~te test to organization 
,",hicb i s int-ended t o keep RD civi lian i'un .. tions under civilian 
nanagc:'ll.cnt , an objective to ,!hicb ,·re know you attach consi der-
able i1!lportant . " 221 
Tnc cable went on to outline the orGanization, and discuss the question 
of the use of U. S. troops : 
111 -
TOP SF.CRET - SeJlsit!ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD DMc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
" •. • vle understand General Westmoreland plans use of limited 
number U. S. forces in buddy system principle to guide e.nd moti-
vate ARVN in PJJ/P. 
Ho'"ever , \ore have serious doubts e.bout any 
fUrther involveL1cnt U. S, troops beyond that in straight pacifica-
tion operat"ons . 
lore fear this ,,!ould tempt Vietnamese to leave 
this work more and more to us and we believe paci fication, "T1th 
its intimate contact with population, more appropriate for Viet-
namese forces, who oust after all as arm of GVN establish con-
structive relations with pOpulation. 
Hence we believe there 
should be no thought of U. S. taking substantial share of paci-
fication . 
The urgent need is to begin effectively pressing 
ARVU . " 'Zi/ 
In Saieon, the Hission noved SlO'.lly . 
answer from Saigon, the State DeJX~rtment 
and curt cable : 
Three days later, "T1th still no 
sent out the following very short 
11 Personal 1'or Lodge and Porter from the Secretary 
"Ref State 83699 
IfREFTEL was discussed today at highest levels, who wished to 
emphasize that this represents final and considered decision 
and who expressed hope that indicated measures COQld be put 
into effect just as rapidly e.s possible ." 21i 
This produced, at last , t",o long answers from Lodge Emd Porter, \orhich laid 
out ",hat the nel' structure was going to look like, and added some personal 
cOmffients from Lodge : 
llFOR THE SECRETARY, SECDEF AND KOl·lER 
11NODIS 
"1. 
This is in reply to your 83699 as amended by your 85196 
concerning which General Hestrnoreland, Porter and I have had 
extensive consultation . 
"2 . 
He will, of course, carry out your i nstructions just as 
rapidl.y as possible, and our p1.o.nning is already far advanced. 
113. 
It i s very gratifying that you feel as "'e do on the 
urgent need to revamp the ARVN, on the importance of putting all 
civiLians in the field under Porter and of having single civilian 
reslJonsibility in province and corps -- measures which ,1e have 
long advocated. 
Doubt ',.;hethel' Ke can change over night habits 
and organization of ARVlf acquired during the last ten years . 
Unless our success against main force daytime activity i s 
cqu~lled by success against {;Uerrillas during the night, s",if't 
imurovement cannot be expected to result si~ply by reorganiza-
tion on the U. S. civil.ian side . 
I t is our ability to infuse 
112 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I}cclassificd per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRE'r - Sensitive 
COUl'age W1d confidence into e.l1 
are involved in ~cification 
,.,hich is at stake. 
the Vietnamese under arrns \'Tho 
both military and police --
"4. 
As regards your instruction for a nilit ary deputy for 
Porter , General Hestl!'.oreland pro 
ses j.:ajor General Paul Smith, 
\\'ho is acceptable to Porter. 
Porter believes General Smith should 
be attached to civilian agency (State Dep::l.l'tment - EcJbassy Sai gon) 
while on this duty, along lines IU'ecedents already establi shed. 
He could wenr civilian or military garb as circumstances require . 
"6. 
General Hestreoreland does not ,,11sh to have a separate 
deputy for Revolutionary Dcvelopment , but has nominated Brigadier 
General William Kno'",lton as Special Assistant for Pacificati on . 
"8. 
Concerning paragraph 4 (c) . 
Nissio!). directive 'Ifill statc 
clearly that Deputy Ambassadol' Porter \'Till be prir.!3.rily occupied. 
with RD and that other 1·1ission business "rill be handled by appro -
priat.e sections of 1·lission. 
'!"oere are certain other aspectl'l to 
consider, hovlever . 
Porter ht!;s assumed charge ",hen I have been 
absent . 
Any change in that respect could only derogate f'rom his 
position i n eyes of Am'Jrican cOnm'..mity and GVli . 
He believes , and 
I concur, thOl.t his assumption of ch'3.rge cannot be ' nominal ' .. ri th-
out risk of dmmgradin~ him in local eyes . 
Additionally, it i s 
essential thet there be a point of decision in 1-1ission, 'rlithout 
ambiguity . 
In· practice , Porter i ntends to leave r outine functi ons 
of Mission (politic~l, protocol, a~~inistrative , personnel, con -
sular , visitors , etc.) to sections normally handling th~~ . 
He 
expects, ho ..... ·ever, to remain closely cognizant o:f political de-
velop;:nents and together ,'lith pol! tict".l counselor and CAS c.l-tief 
t o consult and decide course of action to take or recommend to 
department as circumstances dictate. 
I believe this is reason-
able approach and. have full confidence in his intention to con-
cent.rate on RD. 
"10 . 
Your paragraph 5. 
I have alHays believed that ReVQlu-
tionary Develop.. .... ent/Pacification must be carried out by Vietnamese 
:forces, who ; as you say, must establish constructive relations 
with the population . 
I have never advoca"Ged U. S. forces taking 
on ' substantial ' share of this t.as}~ . 
I do believe , hm·rever , 
that an American presence in this :field amou!tting to e. very 
sma.ll percentaee of the total rua.npo~.,€:r involved could i nd.uce 
ARTII to take the proper attitude by ' on the job ' training and 
cou.ld give the necessary courage and confid€I!ce to the Viet-
names e . 
Lodge II 2§j 
113 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWO Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"f"OR THE SECRETARY, SECDEF AJTD K01IER 
"l'tODIS 
"1. 
Herewitb 1 transmit our recoI:lll.endations carrying out 
your 83699 and 85196 . 
This is the best we can do in the imme-
diate fUture and we think it is a £orward step. 
But 1 believe 
that you rIk1.y ,,;ish to change it as \"le advance along this untrod 
path and learn rlore about circumstances and people . 
Our propo-
sal is as foJ~o',.;S
! 
"a . 
The establishment of an office of op~rations , 
headed by a Director of Operations . 
Thi~ headquarters office 
of operations will include the present staff of : 
(1) USAID/ 
Field Operations ; (2) Ua~ID/PUblic ~~fety; (3) USP.ID/RefUgees; 
(h) JUSB\.O/Field Services (minus NOl'th Viet-Ham bre,nch) ; (5) 
CAJ3/Cajre Operations Division. 
The Office of Op~rations will 
be organized so that the above of£ices will not necessarily re -
ma.in intact when they are merged into a single office. 
For 
example, I intend to disband U&\ID/FO ' s cadre office) and put 
those people nO .... 1 representing AID on cadre affairs directly Wl-
del' the ce..dre office . 
'l'hus there ll:ay be e, net savine in man-
power . 
lib . 
All other divisiollS of AID and JUSPAO \Till remain 
Wlder the control of th0ir respective directors -- I·;o.cDonc.ld 
and Zorthian --
~yho ,,;ill be responsible to Porter) a~ they are 
nO\·" 
for their operations . 
(I exeMpt from tbis the special 
question of pre~s relations, on \lhich Zorthian will continue 
to r eport to me directly. ) 
Thus, for example, !·:acDonald \o1ill 
continue to oversee to Agriculture, Education, Health) Industry, 
etc . ) Divisions ) as ... rell as continue, along ".'ith the economic 
counselor Hehrle, to be responsible for the anti- inf'lation ef-
forts . 
'l'he Director of USAID ,iill be freed fron. responsibilities 
for the field operations , but his job continues to be one of 
vast importanc~ . 
I think it \fill nOirl become more manageable . 
* * * 
I1d . 
At province level He ...,ill select a single civilian 
to be in charge of all other U. S. civilians in the province, 
in same way as Y-'" .... CV senior advis or is responsible for the mili-
tary involved in the advisory effort in the province. 
This 
senior civilian representative ... rill be the U.S. counterpart 
for civilian aff·'3.i.rs to the Vir province cl..ief and, together \11 th 
the MACV senio.r advhor (sector) and the province chief, will 
form the provincial coordi-~ating co~~ttee . 
TIle practice of 
assaultine the province chief with a multiplicity of advisors, 
often giving conflicting advice , should Cea:;e under this arrange-
ment . 
The senior civilian reprecent~tivc ,·.'ill ... · .. rHe the effi-
ciency repOrts of the American civilians L~ the province , 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
regardJ.css of their parent e.gency, and those reports will be 
r evie'.Ted by Porter I s office , which \\'ill also control transfers 
and assignments . 
* * * 
"f'. 
At the more complex region/corps level, we Hill consi der 
a similar system, with a senior ci\~lian representative respon-
sible for the overall U.S. civilian effor t i n the corps area . 
lIe .till work "11th the HACV senior advisor , and will in effect 
be QY agent (and Bill Porter ' s) at the corps . 
I have long be-
l ieved in the need for a sophisticated pOlitically- minded ma.n 
in charge of our effort \·rith the politically volatile corps 
co:n::n.anders , and. this is a step i n that dircction. 
Por ter and 
I Hill be looking carefully for the best men f'or these four diffi-
cult jobs . . . 
"2 . 
I do not Hant another deputy Ambassador . 
I i ntend to 
provi de of'fice space for Porter in the new chancery (his present 
office ,dl l r m:lai n at his disposal even aftt:r he moves ) . 
Ther e 
i s simply no job for another deputy Ambassador , particularly 
since the present political counselor .fOrks closely ,dth me , 
l'eporting dir ectly. 
"3. 
There is no doubt that the steps tlentioned above are 
major ones . 
Clearly I cannot predict no\"! hOi" long they \fill 
t ake to achi eve , or how much di sruption they \·,i ll cause in their 
early stae;es . 
For one thing, I feel that a physical r elocation 
of' cer tain off'lces now spread out across the city is vital, and 
we are no\", s t udyi ng the details of 110'...- to do this . 
Porter Hi ll 
probably need to establish his offices in a building other than 
t he Chancery, in order to give the office of operations a firm 
guiding hand. 
He i-rill, ho-.revel.' , keep an office close to me , 
and he will be kept closely informed of' policy devel opments . 
. x- * * 
"5. I will need your personal support duri ng the period 
which lies ahead. 
I am sure th~t all hands here , regardless 
of agency affili ation, will support this eff'ort to uni fy t he 
U.S. teatl. 
The same must be true of the ag~nc ies that must con-
tinue to backstop us in We.shineton . 
Persormel r ecruitment will 
r emain in your hands , and i t ultim...'l.tely determines the caliber 
.of our efforts , 
Porter vI ill send. you separate messages on the 
question of perEonnel, so that new guidan~e and requi rements 
can be put i nto effect as quickly as possible . 
"6. 
He look fOr\"rard through reorganization to t i ghtening 
and simplifying contacts , advice and coordin~tion ',-lith G\ll'r 
authorities repsonsiblc for RD. 2:1J 
115 . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D:ue: 2011 
TOP SBCRL~ - Sensitive 
E . 
The l!!!.nila Conference 
President Johnson arrived in 1,~ila on October 23, 1966, to attend 
the seven-nation confel'ence of troop contribt:tine countries to the Vietnam 
,-rar. 
Hhile the meeting vias hectic and short , it did produce a communique 
vrhich contained SOr.le r.:.ajor statements about policy, stratcgy, and inten-
tions . 
The three nost iffiportant points in thc co~unique of October 25 
were: 
a . 
The pledge the.t lIallied forces ... shf'~l be withdraim, after close 
consultation, as the other side 'Nithdral-;s its forces to the North , ceases 
infiltration, and the level of violence thus subsides . 
Those forces \'lill 
be 'oIithdra,m as soon as possible and not later than six months after the 
above conditions have been fulfilled . II 
b. 
The announcer:2cnt of a ne,,, program, uhich had been thought up in 
Hashington, for "National Reconciliat:ion. II 
Since the GVH was not in 
genuine agreen:ent in th the idea, but under great pressure from the 
Americans to conmit themselveB to it, the cOD:l!Wlique was quite vague on 
what difference there ,-:as , if any, betvcen the ne~ ... national Reconcilia-
tion progrB.I:1 and the old Chieu Hoi program. 'X> 
c . 
The fOI'J"..a.lization, in nublic, of the I:20VC tOi:ards getting ARVN 
more deeply involved tnth the RD prograr:l: 
liThe Vietnamese leaders stated 
their intent to train and assign a substnntial. share of the armed forces 
to clear-and-hold E.ctions in order to provide a shield behind Hhi ch a 
ne",; society can be built. II 
This public confirL1Stion of the tentative 
steps that l-~CV had been takinc was 1m.portant. 
Cla.ssified documents 
could not be used as the basis for a far - reacbing reform of the .AJW1'l; 
they,""ould never have received wide enough distribution , nor l.'ould they 
have been fully accepted as doctrine by the doubters i-Ti thin both the 
RV1'LllJ' and VACV . 
But here was a piece of paper signed by the President 
and by General Thieu which said in sinple lenguase that a ne\-! directien 
and mssion ""as given to the ARVH. 
After Nenila, MACV and the JCS began 
in seriousness the formation of the oobile training teams which \-,ere de-
signed to retrain every RVNAF unit so that it "ia8 more a~lare of the 
i mportance of the population. 
*Those AI:::cricans who hoped that National Reconciliation Hould become a 
majol- nevf appeal to VC at middle and higher levels , ... ere to be in for a 
disappointment i n the year fo110\ring Manila. 
The Gvn did not agree with 
the philosophy behind total forgiveness to the eneuy, and continually 
hedged its statements and invitations to the VC so that they resembled 
surrender idth w..nesty rather than "national reconciliation. *' 
In fact , 
the GVN did not make an internal announcen:ent on the National Reconcilia-
tion program until Tet , 1967, almost four months after the Nanila 
conference~ and three months after thc GVN had "promisedll the U. S. that 
i t ,",ould ~e the announce:-.(mt . 
Then, \-:hen the Vietna:ucse fit:J-e.lly did 
make the announcer.ent , they used the phrase 'lDoan Ket ,1O wt:ich is accurately 
translatcd as IIUational Solidarity," rather then "I:ational Reconciliation." 
The difference in ~eaning is) of cOllrse, significant , just us the earlier 
mistranslation of "Xay Dung" into "Rcvolut.ionery Development" reflected 
a di~/crgcnc~ of vie· .... .:; . 
ll6 
TOP SECRET - 'Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD DMc: 20 11 
TOP SECRL~ - Sensitive 
The reasoning behind the move to coI:!:llit 1I0re troops to the relatively 
static oissions involved in paci~ication had been laid out in docuu.ents 
and briefings by people as varied as ~~jor General Tillson ~ in his August 
bric~ings of the l,:ission Cmmcil (cited in Section III. C. 7) and Robert 
Komer, in his rn(~orandum to the President. 
B~t a key assumption under-
lying the neH emphasis on population control 'Has the gro .. r.i.ng belief, in 
late 1966, that the main force .. rar was coming to a gradual end. 
1':0 other 
single ~actor played as great a role in the decision to commit troops to 
paci~ication as the belief that they were going to be less and less 
needed for offensive missions against main force units . 
~'he eneroy-
initiated laree unit action statistics sho'ded a sharp drop all through 
1966, ,.;!th a 1m" point of less than t1';0 battalion sized or larger enemy 
initiated actions per month in the last qUal'ter of 1966. 
There was in-
creasing talk of the !lend of the big battalion war , " both i n the press 
and in the Hission. 
Moreover , the first big U.S. push into VC base areas 
i'las eetting under v.'ay, and it '''as possible to believe that ",.hen operations 
like Junction City and Cedar ~'alls were completed, the VC ",ould have few 
placed left to hide ,ri.thin the boundaries of South Vietnal!l. 
Tnus, some 
people "iere arguing in late 1966 and early 1967 that the number o~ troops 
that could be connnitted to RD was considerably higher than the amount 
that General llestmoreland ",as then conteIlPlating; that the "substantial 
numbcrlt of the Manila communique could well be over half of all A.~VIj . 
'l'hese argurr.ents were llsually made orally and tentatively, rather than in 
forual ",rrittcn papers, since they usually raised the ire of the military . 
When r.rl.lita,ry opposition to such a large RD commitment stiffened, the 
suggestions of civilians l1ere often hedged or partially ,,,ithdrawn . 
But 
nonetheless, the fact remains that the undeniable success against the 
main forces in 1966 was the IDRjor justifying factor for those advocating 
i ncreased conmitoent of regular units -- even some U.S . units -- to 
pacification. 
At that time , officials were less Harri ed about the possi-
bility of a major resurgence of the enemy than about the possi bility of a 
ne." guerrilla war phase . 
The fighting in end near the DMZ during Opera-
tions Hastings and Prairie (August-December 1966) had been the heaviest 
of the war , and had been judged not only E.S a major defeat for the enemy 
but as a possible turning point for the enemy, after ,,'hicb he "had begun 
to shift sone of his effort a",ray frOIl conventional, or ' mobile i·tarfare, ' 
tOiI's..l'd the more productive (from his standpoint) guerrilla tactics . " §Q/ 
The r·:o.rines consi dered Hastings and Prairie a foolhardy aberration on the 
enemy ' s part, althOllgh they noted that. the region of the m:z "is reraote , 
favtlring him with interior lines and imrking to our disadvantage thr ough 
extension of our own supply lines." §1j 
The t,:a.rines. felt that the enemy attacks at the DNZ had been designed 
prinarily to dr,'" dO\m resources from the l':arj ne pacification efforts 
near De. nang, an interesting example of ho'" importent they thought their 
erebryonic pacification effort was . 
But, the J·jarines added , whenever the 
enemy probed or patrolled, he ... ·as "pursued by t·:arine inf~tl'Y end pounded 
by air, artillery, and naval gunfire . 
The effort cost him an estimated 
5,000 to 6,000 :N"'VA troops killed or disabled and 1114 .. ,eapons lost .. . and 
meant a severe loss of prestige, and a furthel: erosion of the morale of' 
his troops . " §3j 
117 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Thus, the slowdmm in large enemy actions J according to the l·.a.rine 
estimate, and signs that the future ""QuId see an increase in guerrilla 
activity -- "Hajor r.l8.in force end INA formationo have been relatively 
inactive since Septe~er , as far as large unit nctions are concerned. 
Hmrever , by the end of Decel:iber, corresponding increases "rere already 
beginning to appear in rates of guerrilla activity.11 §Jj 
To ... ,hat extent other r.lilitary and civilian leaders accepted the 
1·:arinc assessment of enemy capability and intentions is not clear from 
the doc~cnts, but the mood of the tice was not far re~ovcd from the 
sentiments cited above . 
The end of the "big \far" ,,,as comng, and paci-
fication "Tas the next step. 
It all fueled the pl'oponents of greater 
pacification efforts by regular troop3) and now) after I.1anila, the 
debate , ... as aJ.ready being conducted on terrain favorable for the first 
time to the pro-pacification advocates . 
liB 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. 
OCO to CORDS 
A. 
oeo on Trial: Introduction 
vlith the c&.ble exchange cO!.1pleted, except for a few minor matters , 
Ambassador Lodge announced the £orcation of the Office of Civil Opera-
tions on Noverr.ber 26, 1966 -- one conth after the original go-ahead 
signal had been given in Hashington, and three weeks af'ter the cable to 
Lodge telling him that the President wanted rapid action . 
~'fuile delays 
of this kind are CO~10n in government and do not normally affect cvents, 
in this case the delay got ace off to a visibly slov start despite the 
fact that the President had clearly indicated to Ledge and Porter that 
he was putting ace on trial and would review its accomplishments in a 
fairly short time. 
1'he reasons for the l·1ission I s slow start revealed agai n just ho\'! 
far apart Washington and its reprcsf::ntativcG in Saigon ,·rere in their 
philosophy and approach to the Hal'. 
\~ashine;ton offlciaJ.s consistently underestiIr.ated the difficulty of 
the actions they t-ranted the I·fission to do, and continually expected move-
ment at speeds literally beyond the capability of the I,iission. 
They held 
these ambitious e>",,]?ectations Mel exerted pl'essurc accordingly -- not 
primarily because of the situation in the pacification pl'o.gram in South 
Vietnam (",hich lias fairly static), but because of growing pressure from 
the public, the press , and Congress for visible nrogress in the war, 
because of growing American domestic dissatisfaction with the course of 
the war. 
If the American public could not §2.f. progress in Vietnam, the 
support the Adrnirlistration had fOl' the ~'/ar \'lould drop steadily . 
In i ts cfforts to show progress so~ members of the Administration 
"rere continue.lly interpreting statistics and events in the oost favorable 
light possible, and its critics -- particularly the press -- llere inter-
preting the sa.'te events in the most unfavorable light possible . 
Since 
events in Vietnam lrere usually open to at least two different interpreta-
tions , the gap beti-l.J.en the Administratj.on and its critics over the basic 
question of Ho',' are He Doing'? gre", steadily during 1966 and 1967 . 
But 
beyond the disagreements over facts and statistics , there \ras a continual 
effort by \'lashington officials to prod Saigon f'or .. ard at a f~ster pace . 
Thus, i f the l·.:.1ssion had just started a crash program at the highest speed 
ever achieved by the Mission, H~shington offIcials, particularly Kor:er, 
acting (he said) in the President' 8 nar:c, vrould demand that the l·lission 
redouble i ts efforts again. 
Komer , in a reflective tlement , called it 
"creative tensivu. II 
The Saigon r·!ission responded to this pressure with resistance a.."'1d 
hostility to',,'ards its \-lashington nbackstops . II 
vlhen warned, for eXar:lple , 
that the P",L'esident lIUS giving oeo 90 to 120 days to prove itself', Lodge 
and ForteI' both shot back pointed comments to the ef'f'ect that this ,".'as 
an inadequate tine period, and l!,t the end of it results "Would probably 
119 
TOP SECRET - Sensitiv-e 
• 
Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
not yet be visible. 
Tney .,.,ere right, of course, but being right "laS not 
good enough . 
They fought the time deadline with too great a vehereence 
and did not do enough to Irprove
lr oeo's worth. 
T'ne result was the dec i s i on 
of V;arch 1967 to put oeo ·under r.1ACV. 
The MissiOll thought that because they ,·;ere Iron the ground" they had 
a unique understanding of the problems of Vietnam, and that because they 
.,'ere on the ground they were the only accurate judges of the rete at 
which events needed to move . 
This point of vie,. did not ta.lce into account 
domestic pressures in the United States ; or, worse, it deliberately dis-
regarded them . 
Thus, the Mission in Vietnatl has generally tended to 
formulate strategy aG though tbe United States ,fill be fighting a slo, ... ',rar 
in Indochina for decades , i-fhile tbe Hashington policymakers and strategi sts 
have tended to behave as though time runs out in November of 1968. 
(T'ne 
mood of the I-fission tm-lards Hashington i s seen more clearly in press leaks 
than in cables . 
Thus , for example, the Evans and Novak column, from 
Saigon, on November 30, 1966, as aco ,-,as being formed and the tri al period 
beginning: 
"A note of quiet desperation is creeping into the top echelons 
of the U. S. t4ission charged with winning the ,,,ar in Vietnam. 
It grows 
partly out of frustration with what one top Embassy offici al describes as 
1 the hot blovT torch on our rear ends ' that comes fror.'l. l'lashington, and, 
particularly, from the I-Thi te House in search of ever- nevT victory pro-
posals ... J·Iuch of this frustration end gloom ~'lould vanish i1' attention in 
Vlashinston were centered not on impossible trance tables for ending the 
vlar next month or next year but on a realistic projection of the modest 
gain no,", being made at great and painstaking effort . " 
The difference in 
mood i s reinforced by the climate of Vietnan., vlhicb i s slugbish and humid, 
and by the inf'luence of the Vietnarcesc, .. rho after many years of ,-rar are 
r arely ready to race out and seek instant immortality on the 1'ield of 
battle or i n the l-tinistries . 
The one exception to this dangerous generali zation bas often been 
the individual Ameri can officer, usually military, serving i n advisory 
or combat positi ons . 
There, vnth a 12-montb tour standard, the Ameri cans 
have pusbed their Vietnamese counterparts hard, and often encountered 
great resistance . 
Indeed, the Americans in Vietnam often think they axe 
already pushing the Vietnamese as hard as is desirable , and that 
Washington'is asking the impossible \-lhen they send out instructions to 
get more out of the Vietnamese . 
~I.'hese ,-;ere some of' the backgrol;Jld factors vlhic1J. were playing them-
selves out in l ate 1966 and early 15'67. 
While tension beh;een Hashington 
and Saigon had existed before, end is i nevitable betv,een headquarters and 
the field , the pressure had by now reached a level higher than ever 
before. tIt is ironic to note that the same \,ensions that exist betueen 
Vlashington and Saigon tend to exist bet\-reen the Americans in Saigon and 
the Americans in the f i eld. 
The phrase "Saigon commo.ndo" is used continu-
ally to castigate the uninfor1:,,~d officials in Saigon. ' There 8.!-e too fe,'r 
people serving in Saigon '\'lith previous field experience, an unavoidable by-
product of the 12-month tour, and this increases the gap.) 
120 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
So i'lashington officials ta~ked about the lack of a sense of urgency 
in the l-iiss:i.on in Viet.rd.m., and the Areericans in Saigon talked about the 
dream world that Hashington lived in, and the Americans in the provinces 
talked about the lack of understanding of the Americans in Saigon who had 
never seen the real \far . 
'i1a.shington was dissa.tIsfied with the progress 
in Vietn3m, and since it could not influence the real obstacle, the 
Vietna~se , except through the American llission, it deliberately put extra 
heat on thE:: Hission. 
At l east one high official involved i n this period 
in Hashington felt that it was a necessary and deliberate charade, nnd 
that only by overdoing its representations to the Mission could Hashington 
assure that son:.e fraction of its desires got through . 
l·!ore than one high-
ranking: official in Saigon felt that the only '<my to handle vla.shington 
was to hold out to them promises of progress and generally calm the home 
front dmm, or else run the risk of inflaming t·lashington and bringing 
still more reorganization dm-m upon the Rissian ' shead. 
Rather than try to apportion responsibility for this sorry state of' 
affairs, it would be useful to see the situation as the by-product of 
tensions produced by the Viet Cong strategy of survival and counter-
punching at GVlJ weak spots, and the GVU's inability to be as good as v:e 
dream they should be . 
The United States could perhaps live with these 
problems in an age in ,·Thien corr:mnications Here not instantaneous, and 
publicity not so unrclentin~ . 
Beyond this broad philosophical point, ho,.,ever , the fact is that 
the l·.1ission in Vietnam was baclly oreanizcd to conduct almost any kind 
of l arge and complex ope-l'ation, let alone a ,·,ar . 
Thus '·lashington was 
right to reorganize the t·lission, and Saigon ' s reaction to each r eorganiza-
tion inevitably suggested that still more vms needed. 
Beyond that , the Mission in Vietnam did not have the full confidence 
of the vlashington bureaucracy and Porter still lacked Lodge's :full 
support . 
121 
TOP SECR~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
B. 
OCO on Trial : 
Too Little Too Late -- Or I~ot Enough Time? 
With the fornation of oeo in late IJovember the civilian mis~ion 
began to =.ove at e n:.ore r5.pid p3.Ce· than it had in the post-Honolulu 
period. 
Host of this motion, or course, was jnternru. to the U.S. 
J4ission and could not produce visible results against the ve, an under-
standable fact when one considers the ~ount or work that the decision 
involved. 
F-lrst, a Director of" Civil Operations had to be chosen . 
Since 
Washington dereanded rapid action, it "\Ie.s decided that the choice had. to 
be 00'1eone already in Vietnam and ready to ,",ork, which sharply narro"\-red 
the list of possible Dcn. 
The i'inal selection was L . Hade Latbram, who 
had been the deputy director of USAID. 
Lathram was to prove to be the 
wrong man at thc wrong time, a methodicn.l. and slow vOl'ker with strong 
re8pcct for the vcry interagency systClll that he "'as supposed to super-
cede. 
In normal bureaucracies, Latbram could, and had, 
co~piled excel-
lent, records, but OCO was demanding extraordinal.'Y results, and these 
required leadership and drive which Lathram did not possess . 
It had been anticipated that Porter, a popular Ambassador and a 
knowledgeable and realistic man, would supply that leadership and drive , 
and that Lathr8ll1 ,",culd simply run the oeo staff bela"\! Porter . 
But 
neither POl'ter nor Latbram saw their roles thut way . 
Once OCO was 
famed, Porter to an unexpected degree stftyed o.WP.y f'rom the d::'y to dr>.y 
decisions , leaving them to Lathram. 
And Lathram simply did not have the 
position nor the stature to stand up to the full members of the Mission 
Council, whose assets he now partially controlled . 
( 'l'hcl'e was continued 
confusion over what was the responsibility of 000 and what remained under 
the control of the US.4ID, CIA and JUSPAO directors , and this confusion 
was never resolved - - and continues today under the CORDS structure . ) 
l.ioreover, Porter, who had not "\-:anted a second Deputy Ambassador to 
come in to relieve him of all non -RD matters , Boon found himself tied 
down in the business of' the Embassy. 
Lodge \Tent on a long leave shortly 
after the forcation of OCO, tnking about one month ' s vacation in Europe 
and the United States . 
This left Porter \lith responsibility fOl' the full 
gamut of Ambassadorial activities, and he unavoidably became less and 
less concerned '"lii:h the progress of oeo, even though i t was in its first 
critical month. 
He hed been given an office in the new oeo building 
(appropriated from AID), but he rarely used it, staying in the Embassy 
in another part of Saigon, and shO'odng, in effect, by his failure to use 
his oeo orfice often that he could not devote much time to OCO. 
The failure, therefore, to isolate Porter frol!l all non-RD matters 
and provide Lodge with a full time DCU turned out to be a serious error. 
Mcnamara had clearly foreseen this in his 15 October memora'1dum to the 
President. 
In retrospect , we can see that Porter should have been given 
one job or the other) and the vacancy filled -- as lTashington had suggeGted. 
122 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 1\ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
But \otashington had just finished cr.:umning an unpleasant action do·,.m the 
Mission rs throat, and it was ~elt that there were limits to how much 
the Hission should be asked to take, especially since Lodge and Porter 
were so adamant on the subject . 1/ 
Also, no one could f'oresee how 
diverting other matters would become to Porte. , or how much he would 
dele sate to Lathram. 
The second cajor decision ~or 000 was the selection of the Regional 
Directors -- men who \-muld be given full control over all American 
civilians in their respective regions . 
Here Porter presented Lathram 
with three nominees (II Corps was left unfilled until. a few weelts later) 
and the choices appeared to be quite Bood ones : in I Corps , Porter's former 
Assistant Deputy k'lbassador, Henry Koren ; in III Corps, the f'ormer r.1ACV 
Division Senior Advisor, then with AID, John Paul Vann i and in the Delta, 
the CIA I S former support chief, Vince Heymann . 
Thes::! were three respected 
men, and they ccme from three different agencies, which empha.sized the 
interagency nature of OCO . 
In picking Vunn, Porter had made a major 
decision l .. hich involved possibly antngonizing both the CIA and MACY, for 
Vann \ras without que::;tion onc oi' the most controversial Americans in 
Vietnam. 
He stood for impatience "Hh the Jimerican Mission, deep and 
often publicly-voiced disgust with the course of' the past rive years, 
strone convictions on what nccded to be done, driving energy and an 
encyclopedic kno'.fledge of recent events in Vietnam -- and was a burr in 
the side of the CIA, vith "hich he had frequcntly tangled, particularly 
over thc cadre program, and nACV, \lith which he had fought ever since 
dis~ereeing publicly with General Harkins in 1963 (a fight which led to 
his reSignation from the k:my and w:!.s extensively discussed in David 
Halberstam I s book, The liMine of a Quagmire .) 
The importance of the appointments was not lost on tbe Mission or 
the press . 
\olliile Lathram' s appointment had stirred the bureaucracy but 
not the press, the regional directors came as a surprise and a major 
st01~ . 
In a front-page story in The Washington Post, Ward Just described 
Vann as "one of the legendary Americc.ns in Vietnam," and said that Koren ' s 
apPOintment indicated the great importance the Mission attached to thc 
jobs. Just added that "there were indications that, if OCO did not 
succeed) the mili tery command \tould take charge of pacif'ication, or 
, Revolutionary Develonment .: II 2/ 
-
-
Next came the selection of oeo Province Representatives, t o be chosen 
out of the available talent in each province. 
Here "the slowness o~ the 
civiHans began to tell, mld it was not until January tha.t the appoint-
ments could be made for every province . 
Trying to pick men on the basis 
of their }.nowle:~ge and ability takes time and requires trips to each 
province, consultations with other Mis~ion Council members, etc .) and 
the civilians set out to do all tbis . 
l'>!eanwhile, 
wa.s undzr,,",9.Y 
~-
a hugc job which no one in Washington could fully appreciate 
the physical relocation of o~f'iccfj th:tt Lodge had 
123 . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
«
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 6331 6. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRtT - Sensitive 
described as necesse.!"J in his November 16 cable . 
Even in Hashington it 
rJay be difficult to get furniture and phones moved, except for vc!"y bigh-
r ankinG people; in Saigon a t!ajor relocation was more difficult to mOlmt 
t han a lJilitary operation . 
"Hhile thi3 WE:.S going on, involving literally 
ovcr one thousan.l people , work in OeD ",as even more confused and sporadic 
t han usual. 
none of these minol' organizational events would be of any importance 
if it were not f'or the fact that they were eating away at the :r.teager time 
allotted to the civilians to provc that OeD should rcr::.ain indep~ndent of 
HACV , 
But they did conS1.Xrr'.e time , and this was to prove to be a factor 
in evaluating oeo. 
The docUlJlents do not ansuer the question of whether or not OCO ever 
real.ly had a chance to survive} or whether it was just alloifed to start 
up by people· Hho had already decided to turn RD ovcr to l·rACV i n a few 
mont·hs . 
Both possibilities fit the available facts . 
An educated guess 
would be that the decision to givc HcstEoreland control was tentatively 
made by the President in the late fall of 1966, but thnt he decided he 
would gain by allowing tbe civilinns to reorganize first . 
If' oeo proved 
to be a major success, he could always continue to defer his decisi on . 
If oeo fell short 01" the mark, then it still "WOuld be a.""l orgnnizati on i n-
being ready to be placed into MACV without fUrther internal changes, and 
that in itself' \7ould be a t1ajor gain . 
Horeover, if the changes came when 
J~odge a'1d Porter ~rere gone, there would be less diff'icuJties . 
.If' aco movcd too slowly for Hasrington ' s satisi'action; 
i t nonethel ess 
accomplished many things which had previollsly been beyond the Nission I s 
ability : 
- - Uniting personnel f rom AID, CIA, and JUsPAO into a singl e Plans 
& Evaluations Section, oeo produced the first integrated pl a.'1s f or RD 
on the U.S . side . 
Theze plans ,.,..erc 81~bit ious and far -reaching, and 
required l-IACV inputs . 
The fact that "the civilians were asking I·lACV 
for inputs to their own planning, r ather than the reverse , so st art led 
HACV that l·1ACV, in turn, began fJOre intensive di scussions or plans , 
The 
planning effort involved several military officers on loan to oeo, a f act 
which further heightened tension between oeo and MACV. 
When the plans 
first formulated were presented to General llestrnor el and, he indicat ed that 
he was not goi ng to be bound by any plans which reduced his flexibility 
and ability t o l'espond to mi litary pressure "Hhenever and wher~vel' i t 
occurred; that is, he waS reluctant to commit many milit ary assets t o 
pe~anent RD SUpp01~ activitics . 
But the relentless pressure from oeo, 
fran KO~.ler in ' ;.lshinetol1, a.l1d evcn from the p lblic attention focused on 
t he i ssue by Article 11 of the Manila cOIIallW1iqi.le ("The Vietnamese leader s 
stated their j ntent to train and assign a substantial share of t he anned 
forces to clear-and-hold actions in order to provide a ~hield behind which 
a new society can be built II ) all were working against General Hestreorcl and, 
and to.fords the assignncnt of ARVJ.l units to RD missions . 
TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
, 
-- The civilians in the provinces spoke with a single voice for the 
fil"st tille . 
The province chiefs velcomed the change for this reason, 
accordiJ"1.g to mont observers. 
r1i thin the American team in each province, 
there vas now a built-in obligation to consult with each other, instead 
of the previous 3ituation in which more and mere agencies were sending 
down to the provinces their own men who worked alone on their own project$ . 
The very act of physical relocation of the five major bro.nches 
of oeo into a single building changed attitudes and behavior patterns in 
the civilian mission. 
Public Safety and the Special Branch advisors, 
for cxample, nm, were co-located, and began wurking together closely. 
Previour:ly, th':"!y had both advised the same -people through completely 
separate channels whicb met only at the top; i.e . , when the chiei' of the 
Public Saf'ety branch and the deputy CIA station chief fu'1.d sOr.l.ething 
specific and urgent they had to resolve. 
On the d.a¥-to-d.aJr matters, 
there had actualJy been a delibel'ate co;.lpari:mentalization before OCO was 
fonned. 
'l'hese examples of gains could be repeated across a broad front . 
They "l-Tere fir·st steps in a direction which mlght ultimately hnve created 
a strong civilian mission, given time, better leaders, and more support 
frO:.:1 ifa.:::hington. 
But even without these thinGS, OCO we'l a definite plus . 
The period behieen December and April was a period in \Thicl! every-
onc paid lip nervice to the idea of supporting OCO, but in reality it 
was snip~d at and attacked aJ..most from the outset by the bureaucracies . 
In Saigon, Zorthlan, and Hart, Directors of' JUSPAO and CIA, res-pectively, 
t.:.e.de it clear that they wanted to remain very much involved in any deCision 
aff'ecting their respective fields of' endeavor. 
While this was a l'easonable 
point of view, it meant that CIA and even USIA officers in the field often 
refused to accept any guida.~ce from the OCO representative, and cnses 
began to come to light in which oajor actions were being initiated by the 
CIA without any consultation with ceO. 
(The CIA reasoning and def'enr;e 
l'csted on the fact that one of Hart I S deputies was ostensibly en assistant 
director of oeo.) 
In l-Je.shinE;ton, there \1aS open skepticism to oeo f'rom a.lI:l.ost eJ.1 
quarters, particularly AID, 'rhich found itself footing most of the bill. 
USIA and CIA both indicated that they \:ould continue to deal directJy 
.... ith their field personnel. In theory, everyone in Hashington was to 
participate in the b~.ckstopping of the interagency oeo, but in practice, 
.Iithout a sillgle voice in charge, this meant that no one was helping 
OCO, no one was ~rying to sell the~ as a going concern in Washington. 
yu>mer's role he~c was ambiguous; he su~ported OCO as long as it was in 
operation, end pl'obably contributed more to its achievements than 2IIY-
ODe else in Hashington, but at the same time he was aJ..ready on the 
r ecord as favorine a mil! tery takeover, which was the ve!y thing oeo 
sought to avoid. 
125 . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Seclion 3.3 
NND Projeci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 201 I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
vTeshington had decreed OCO, end had given Porter great responsibil ity, 
UnfortunateLy, they had failed to give him authority and stature needed 
t o mAke the agencies ,",ork together . 
As pointed. out before, this might ..... ell htl.ve been overcome i f time 
had not been so short . 
The slow methodical wuy of movi ng bureaucracies 
may be more effective than sweepi ng changes, anywSlf, if one has t ime . 
But in Vietnam no one was being given much time . 
Shortly after OCO was formed, Komer ' s deputy, Ambassador Hilliam 
Leonh3Xt, visited Vietnam, and ..... hen he returned, wrote t he following 
penetrating assessment, which was sent to the President, Secretaries 
Rusk und ilC:ro."lara, and lotr. Gaud and Nr. Helms : 
"lThether Porter I s new Office of Civil Operations (oeo) 
i s vieved as a 1'inal organizational solution or as an inevi t -
able intermediate step i t is achieVing a number of useful 
purposes . It establishes, on the civil side for t he first 
time, unifi ed interagency direction with a chain 01' command 
llnd c OltG~t1nication from Saigon to the regions and provinces . 
I t centralizes US-GVU field coordination of civil matters in 
one US of~icial at ecch level . It affords a civil-side ~ramework 
,-rhich c .... n work more effectively Hi th US military for poli tico-
mili tal"Y coordinati on and T.lOre integrated pacification pl anning . 
UAt t he tine of my visit, oeo ' s impact had been felt 
mainly in Saigon . 
Its headquarters organization was largely 
completcd. 
Three of the .four Regional Directors had been 
named, all ~~re at work, and one was in full t ime residence 
i n his region . 
Regional staffs were being assembl ed but not 
yet i n place , 
At province level, tea.-ns ""ere being inter-
viewed for the selection of Provincial Representatives . 
Porter eA~ect5 them to be desi gnated by January 1 . 
Some 
slipPSSC is possible, and i t L1ay be 90 da:;ys or so before t he 
new orGanization i s functioning . 
I participated in the initial 
briefings of the province teams I visited, passing along and 
cT,lphasi:',ing Bob Komer ' 5 admonitions against over-bureaucratization 
of ef~ort and for fast and hard action. 
These were lf~11 -
recei ved . 
Morale was good. 
All the GVN Province Chiefs vith 
whom I talked thought the ne" structm'e a great i mpr ovement. rr J/ 
126 
TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projeci Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Dale: 201 I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
C. 
Time Runs Out 
The decision to turn pacification over to MACV , with an integrated 
civil-military chain of corr.raand, ,,'as announced in Saigon on Nay 11, 1967, 
by Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker . 
In his announ...:ement , Bunker said tbat 
the decision v..e.s entirely bis . 
But Bunker had. been in Vietnam as Ambassador f'or less than t~,·o ,·:eeks, 
and he was therefore clearly acting under strong guidance , if not orders , 
from i/ashington. 
The decision to give HACV l"esponsibility had actually 
stemncd fran the cJear and unmistakable fact that the President now con-
sidered such a reorganization highly desirable . 
It is not clear when the President decided tbis in bis own ~nd . 
The documents do not shed any light on this point, and , indeed, they 
simply fail to discuss the pros and cons of the deciSion in the early 
months of 1967, when the subject was a hot one in l'lashington and Saigon. 
This all suggests that ,,,.hatever consideration of the issue was going on 
was confined strictly to private sessions between principals, and that 
the staff ,,'ork previously done on a highly restricted basis "'as no longer 
considered l:ecessary by the principals . 
It has been suggested that the President had been strongly in favor 
of the move for months before he finally gave the go-ahead signal, and 
t hat he "ras held back by the strong opposition from. Lodge and Porter , 
from Katzenbach , from the agencies in Hashington -- and by the fact that 
it would appear to be a further nmilitariz&.tion" of the ei'forL This may 
well be the case ; certainly nothing in the record disproves this pocsibility. 
But since there is no ","ay that this study can anS\'1'er the question, it must 
be left undecided . 
Whenever the President made his decision in his mm mind , he chose 
the Guam meeting as the place to discuss with a group of concerned 
officials outside his own personal staff. 
In a private meeting on 
March 20, or 21, 1967, with senior of'ficials f'rom Hashington and Saigon, 
the President indicated tbat he felt the time had came to turn pacifica-
tion over to j·1ACV . 
The President enjoined those in the room at that 
meeting not to discuss the decision with anyone until it "fas announced , 
and he did not inform the GVN . 
At the end of the Guam meeting, the President ~ent Komer back to 
Saigon ,dtb Hestnoreland and Lodge, and Komer spent a week there , work-
ing out prelirnina,ry details of the reorganization . 
By this time Komer 
knew that he i-:.9,.E to became Deputy to General v"estmoreland , although mE.l1Y 
details remained to be ironed out . 
When Komer returned to Washington, with the preliminary plans , a 
perioi followeJ during which no further action on the reorganization was 
taken . 
In all, nearly two months went by from the President ' s statement 
127 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
1 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. SeCliQn 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 6331 6. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
at GU'JID to the public announc(;r:!ent , during "hich only a handf'ul of people 
in Hashington and Saigon kne~l ",-hat was going to happen . 
The delays were 
caused by a combination of factors : 
Bun1~er ' s Wlderstandable des4'e to 
spend some time on personal business before going to Sai gon, the Presi-
dent I s desire to have Bunker I:la.'<.e the f'jnal anrouncC!ll.ent hinself af'ter 
he bad reached Saigon, the need to \-.. ork out f'inal details . 
Since the 
President Has the man ",ho had pressed everyone else working on Vietnam 
to greater and greater effort, and since he stood to lose the most from 
loss of time, it is surprising that he was now ",·iiling to see two months 
l ost , with a tired and lane - duck Mission in Vietnam, \-laiting for the ne\1 
team in a highly apprehensive state, and confusion at the higher levels . 
But for reasons \lhieh are not readily appc.rcnt, the President did not push 
his ne,,' tepJ!l., and it was not until May 13, 1967, that Bunker made his 
annoWlccr.'!ent (" .. hich ha1 been drafted by Komer) : 
"Since being appointed U. S. Ambassador to Vietnrun I have 
been giving a great deal of thought to ho .... · to organize most 
e£fectively the U. S. Advisory role in support of the Vietnamese 
government ' s Revolutionary Development e~fort . 
Like my prede-
cessor , I regard RD -- often terned pacification - - as close to 
the heart of the matter in Vietnam , 
"Support of Revolutionary Development has scemed to me and 
lilY senior colleagues to be neither exclusively a civilian DOl' 
exclusively a military f'unction, but to be essentially civil-
lnilitary in character . It involves both the provision of con-
tinuous local security in the countryside -- necessarily a 
primarily military task and the constructive prograns conducted 
by the t-1inistry of Revolutionery Development, largely through 
i ts 59-mer:lber RD teams . 
The government of Vietnam has recog-
nized the dual civil-military natllre of the RD process by 
assigning responsibility for its execution to the CorpS/Region 
C01llI:lenders and by deciding to assign the bulk of t he regular 
ARVN, as well as the Regional and Popular fOl'ces, to provide 
the indispensable security so that RD CeIl proceed in the cOWltry-
side , 
As senior A.>nerican official in Vietnam, I have conc),uded 
that the U. S. Advisory and supporting role in Revolutionary 
Develo~ent can be made more ef'fective by unifying its civi l 
and military aspects under a single management concept . 
Unifi ed 
managencnt , a single chain of' cOl:illland, and a more closely dove-
tailed advisol'Y effort ",111 in rrr:.r opinion greatly improve U. S. 
support of the vital RD program. 
Therefore, I am giving 
General \·lestmorelo.nd the responsibility f'or the performance of 
our U, S. t4.i::sion field programs in rupport of pacification or 
Revolutionary Developncnt . 
To assist him in perfOrming this 
function , I am essigning Mr , Robert Koner to his headquarters 
to be designated as a deputy to CO:.fUSMACV '\dth personal r ank of 
61:l.bassador . 
128 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 1\ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
"I have t~,o basic reasons for giving tlus responsibility 
to General Hestmoreland . 
In the first place, the indispensable 
first stage of pacification is providing continuous local 
security, a :function primarily of RVNAF , in which j·1ACV performs 
a suPportin6 advisory role . 
In the seconl place , the greater 
part of the U. S. Advisory and Logistic assets involved in 
support of Revolutionary Develop!:1ent belong to MACV . If uni-
fied management of U. S. 1-1ission assets in support of the 
Vietnamese program is desirable , Cm.ruS14ACV is the logical 
choice . 
"I have directed that a single chain of responsibility for 
advice and support of the Vietnamese Revolutionary Develo~ent 
program be instituted from Saigon down to district level . 
Just 
as Mr . Komer will supervise the U. S. Advisory role at the Saigon 
level a3 Deputy To General "lestooreland, so will the present oeo 
regional directors serve as deputies to U. S. field force com-
manders . 
"At the province level, a senior advisor will be desig-
nated, cither civilian or military, follm-ring analysis of the 
local situation . 
IlWhile management will thus be unii'ied, the integrity of' 
the Ofi'icc of Civil Operations will be preserved . It uill con-
tinue to perform the same functions as before, and will continue 
to have direct communication on technical matters with its f'ield 
echelons. 
Tbe present Revolutionary Development support division 
of l-lACV ,d~l be integrated into OCO, and its chief will serve as 
deputy to the Director of oeo . 
Such a. Wlified civil/military 
U. S. advisory eff'ort in tbe vital field of Revolutionary Develop-
ment is unprecedented. 
But so too is the situation "'hich we 
confront . 
RD is i ll my vie," neither civil nor military but a 
unique merging of both to meet a unique wartime need . 
Thus my 
r esolution is to have U. S. civilian and military officials Hark 
together as one team in order more effectively to support our 
Vietnamese allies . 
f.1any fUrther details will have to be worked 
out , and various difficulties will doubtless be encountered, 
but I am confident that this realignment of responsibilities is 
a sound management step and I count on ell U. S. officers a~d 
officials concerned to make it ,,",ark effectively in practice . 11 !!./ 
Btmker outlined to Hashington the line he proposed to take during a 
question and an~ .;er period ",ith the press ; 
I1Besides the above announcement , I intend to stress the 
f'ollowlng basic points in ans~;er to press questions. or in 
backgroUt."lding: (a) I made this decision not because I think 
129 . 
TOP SEe~~ - Sensitive 
) 
I 
I 
I 
Declassified per EXectllivc Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND ProjecI Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 20[ [ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
that U. S. civilian support of RD has been unsatisfactory - - on 
the contrary I em pleased with progress to date - - but because 
I think it is essential to bring the U. S. military more fully 
into the RD advisory effort and to pool Oill' civil/military . 
resources t~ get optimum results : (b) ind~ed I regard all 
official Americans in Vietnam as part of one team , not as 
part of cOlrpetiog civilian and nilitary establishments : (c) 
as senior U. S. official in Vietnam, I intend to keep a close 
eye on all U. S. activities , includinG pacification - - I am 
not abdicating any of ny responsibilities but rather rum having 
the entire U.S. pacification advisory effort r eport to me 
through General Hestmoreland r ather tha.'1 throuzh two channels 
as in the past: (d) during 34 years in the business Horld I have 
learned that unified managenent \.-ith clear lines of authority is 
the way to get the most out of lBl'ge scale and highly diversified 
progrruns : (e) since continuous locti security, ~.Thich RVUAF must 
primarily provide, is the indispensable first stage of the paci-
fication process, the YlACV chain of' cOIn::l9.nd can obviously be 
helpful to the RVnAF: 
f:....'1d (f) I intend to see that the civtlian 
element of' the U. S. effor.t is nCit b\U'ied under the military - -
in many instances soldiers ...... ill end up "'orking for civilians as 
well as the reverse - - in fect Ambassador Kotler will be General 
i'!estmoreland's principal assistnnt for this f'lU1ction while 
General Knowlton ,,-ill be deputy to r·:r. Lathram of oeo. 
I intend 
to keep fully informed personally about all developments in this 
field and to hold frequent meetings with General Hestmoreland 
aJld Ambassador Kotler for the purpose of formulating policy." L/ 
The reaction of the civilians in Vietnam to the annoW1cement of 
Ambassador Bunker was one of dismay . 
In the first confused days , before 
details of the reorga'1ization could be ,.-orked out and announced, tbe 
press \-,as able to write several c.rticles which probably were accurate 
reflections of the mood of most civilians : 
"Civilian reactions today ranged from the bitter ( 'I'!e 
don ' t think they can do their o~-:n job -- how· can they do ours? ' ) 
to the resigned ('I'll be a good soldier and go along ' ) to the 
very optimistic ('He 've finally got a civilie..¥J. in among the 
generals ' ) . 
Almost nO\i"here was there much enthusiasm for what 
Bunker celled ' a unique experiment in a unique situation . I 
"Nor was there jubilation at the Aoerican r:ti.li tary com.mand . 
~lestmoreland, who 'lfanted to take charge of the pacification pro-
gram ~~ro ye'U's ago , is nOli" rl?ported to be deeply skeptical of 
the possibility of producing the kind of quick results the \·1hite 
House apparently ','ants. 
"'I did not volunteer ror the job, I he is reported to have 
said privately this morning, 'but no'", that I 'v~ got it, I'll do 
my 1?est with it , 1 
130 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projeci Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Dale: 201 I 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
II • •
• Serious official.s - - both civilian and mil.itary __ 
realize there are limitations on how far an officer will go 
in reporting 'negative ' informa.tion, and how hard a civili an , 
now bis subordinate , will fight for realism . 
II ••• Officials today sought to mitigate the effect of the 
announcclnent by saying that Komer and his staff, physically 
l ocated in the .AI!lerican Military Command in Saigon , will be 
in a far better position to influence the course of Pacifica-
tion than he would among ' all the guys with glasses and sack 
suits ' in the Office of Civil Operations . II §j 
The Vietnamese reaction to the ~reorganization "las more diffi cult to 
gauge . 
Hard Just, in the same story cited above, said "There was surpris-
ingly little cor.nent today fro:!l South Vietnar.:tese, "iho ha-.... e seen so many 
efforts at pacification and so mnny efforts to a.ttempt to organize and 
reorganize themselves. 
One high American '\;'ho professed to have spoken 
with the Sout.h Vietna:.lese cO:::Dna.'1d reported they are ' delighted . II' 
But 
Kanter ' s talk ,.;1th General Nguyen Duc Thang, the I·linister for Construc-
tion (RD) , did not l'cveal any delight on Thang ' s part . 
Indeed , Thane ' s 
first reaction was that the GVN should emulate the U. S. and turn pacif'i-
cation over to the Ministry of Defense 
an action which ,muld have rWl 
directly c:ounter to the U.S. objective of encouraging civilian govcrn-
me.'1t in Vietnam. 
There is no telegra.phic record of the first series of talks that 
Komer and Bunker had "Tith Ky, Thieu, Vien, and Thang on the reorganiza-
tion . 
IIot until a K01!:er-Ky talk of I·lay 15 does the cable tl'affic reflect 
the GVN reaction to the reorganization . 
By this time , it should be noted , 
the GVN knew that the U ~ S . did not want the GVN to follm·, suit , and it 
knew all our arguments and could play them back to us with case: 
"Ky sai d that General Thung had suggested that the RD 
effort be brought under Dei'ense Hinistry to coni'orm to the 
U. S. reorganization . 
Ky and General Vien had demurred on 
erounds that Gueh a reorganization on the GV1{ side would be 
fur more complex than on U. S. side, would disrupt RD process , 
and liOuld stretch General Vien a.T1d j·lOD too thin . 
Besides it 
"muld not be politically advisable at the very time when there 
"ras a hopeful trend tm-lard a more civi lianized and representa-
tive government . 
Komer agreed with Ky-Vien reasoning . .. " ]} 
131 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per ExecllIive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NNO 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
D. 
The CORDS Reorc~nization 
With Bunker ' s announccPlent, the 1-115510n began its second massive 
reorganization in five months . 
This time , t he r eorganization was 
acconpanied by Ole of the periodic turnovers : n Mission Council per-
sonnel vhich have characterized the r·1ission : 
for some reason, t he 
t ourc of many high-ranking o~ficers seem to end at roughly the same 
til?e, and thus, in 1964, 1965 J and again in the spl'ing of' 1967, 
several key ruerolbel'c of the Uission Council all lef't within a i'C\! 
weeks of each other. This t~e , in addition to Ambassador Lodge, 
Porter, Habib , and '~chrle all left within a. short period of' time , and 
only a high-level decision -- announced by Bunker at the same t.ime as 
t he reorganization -- kept Zorthian and Lansdale on for extensions . 
Into the Mission caee Bunker, Locke) Komer, General Abrams, the new 
D2puty COl-fUs/1ACV, and Charles Cooper, the new Economic Counselor, and 
Archibald Calhoun, the new Political Counselor. 
Despite the turnover, the reorganization seemed to proceed with 
corr:o .. 'lrative ease . 
Perhaps the fact that oeo had already been formed 
"taS critical here) since it I'!eant that instead of MACV dealing with 
three ngencicG slllultaneousl.y) the first discussions could be restricted 
prloarily to HACV and OCO. 
r·ioreovcr, because OCO was already a going 
conceru, the civilicns were better organized than ever before t o main-
t ain their own posl tion in dealings with the mill tary. 
But above all, it was the decisl.on by llestruoreland and Bunlcer to 
l et KO!ner take the lead in the reorganization which was ir:lportant . 
Komer now IiUlde major decisions on how the new structure "" ould look 
which ,·:ere usually backed up by We3tt!oreland . 
The result looked much 
bctter than many people had dared bope . 
The details of the r eorganization are not worth detailed discussi on 
her e . 
Bl.tt one point can illustrate the way CORDS could resolve pre-
viouz~v unresolved issues : the question of the role of the ARVN 
Di vision i n the chain o~ cor.mand. 
As noted in an earlier section, st udy groups had over t he years 
advucatcd removing the AlnnT Divisions from the chain of co~nand on 
Pacification/RD. 
But MACV hed large advisory teatls "rith the Divi si ons 
and these teans controlled both the sector (Province) advisory teems 
and Regimental advisory terons bel ow them. 
The structure i'ollmred normal 
mi litary lines, and reade good sense to most of t he officers i n the 
higher levels of HACV. 
The counter-argument was that Division was a purely mili tary 
i nztruPlent and could not adequately control the integrated civilian-
nil1tary effort that vas needed at the Province l evel. 
Thus the Roles 
and K:!.zsions Study Group, for example, had recomI!lcnded that TtDivisi on 
be R~~oved from the RD Chain of C~d 
... that t he rol e of the Province 
132 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. SeCliQn 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Chief be upgraded • . • that Province Chiefs have operational control (as 
a minimum) of all militnry and paramilitary forces assigned to operate 
exclusively in their sector. II Y 
The Study Group recognized that 
"the po\rel.' structure being what it is in the GVN, major progress toward 
t his goal ..... <ill I at be short range 01' spectacu:.ar . II 
But, they urged, 
the U.S. should begin to push forflard on it . 
MACV had nonconcurred in this recommendation. 
General tlestmoreland, 
in'a memorandum to Lodge on September 7, 1966, had said that he did not 
ngree with the iden) and' that, if carried out, lithe Corps span of control 
would be too large for effective direction . II 
The suggestion, he added, 
was "illogicul.
11 2.1 
This was still the post tion of llJACV when Komer arrived. 
In his 
attempts to find a workable civilian-mili tnry chain of cornnand, he 
recei ved b;o sUBge~tions on the difficult question of the role of the 
Division advisory teans . 
The first, and more routine, was to continue 
the existing '·rACV system -- in which, no matter how good or bad the 
GVN chain of command may be, the U.S. simply duplicates it on the advisory 
side . 
This would reeun that all ~;erican civilians and uilitary at the 
Province level would come under the Division-Corps chain of cOIlJl!l::md. 
The NACV staff assumed that this vould happen . 
John Paul Vann and a feu colleagues had a different suggestion . 
Vann naintnincd that the evidence ~uggested that when the tilllericans 
made their desires known clearly to the Vietnar:;,ese, without the vague-
ness and contradictoriness which so often characterized them, then the 
Vietnamese usually would follow suit after a suitable period of time . 
Thu~, said Venn, if the A~ericans remove the Division advisory team 
from the U.S. chain of command, except for tactical matters and logistical 
support, the GVN may folloW, and reduce the power of their politically 
potent Divisions . 
The thesis Vann was putting forward -- that the GVH would follow 
8 strong U.S. example - - vus Wltested and hotly disputed. 
Secondly, 
t here was the matter of NAeV 1 s stand against do\>mgrading the role of 
the ARVN Divisions . 
Few people observing the discussions thought that 
the Vann suggestion had a chance of success . 
~Jt Kaner, persuaded by the argument ) did overrule many of his 
staff and nake the recommendation to \festmoreland. 'i1estmoreland approved 
it, and in JW1e, 1967, the ne\>T chains of coomand were annOWlced to the 
U.S. }~ssion . 
After years of arguing, during all of which the trend 
had been tmmrd: stronger ARVn Divisions, the U.S. had suddenly reversed 
course on itn own, >rithout waiting for the Vietnrunese to act , 
The Change 
was so complete that it even extended to that last (and) to career 
office1·s, cost important) question : 
who writes the efficiency report , 
Under the new iiACV guidance, the Senior Province Advisor \>;ould be rated 
133 . 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: Nt-.'l) 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 t 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
not by the Division Senior Advisor, but by the Deputy for CORDS 
~~d 
the Corps level -- thus confirming the new command arrangements . 
llhile it is still too early to tell if tht! GVN will completely 
f ollo\-.' the U. S. lead, the early evidence suggests that the Vnnn 
hypothesis vrus correct , and that following the U. S. action, the GVN 
has begun to reduce the role of their Divisions in RD . 
There are now 
indications that the GVN is seriously considering a plan in which the 
Divisions would no longer have area responsibility but rather be 
r educed to support of ~heir forward units, and operational command on 
large operations of troops . 
134 
TOP SECRET - SenSitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201\ 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
E . 
The l,ussion Assessment as CORDS Begins 
The situation that CORDS and P~bassador Ko~cr inherited was ~ot a 
very promising one. 
Despite all the lip service and all the 1ttop 
priorities" assigned RD by the Jt.l!l.ericans in the preceding 18 months ) 
progress in tbe field ,·ras not only not satisfactory, it "las, according 
to many obser'/'ers , nonexistent . 
The question of vhetber \·;e were inching 
fOl'vrard, standing still, or moving backward ahle.ys seemed to tbe t·lission 
and '\Vashington to be of great import8J1ce ) and therefore much ei'fort \-las 
spent trying to analyze our "progress . " 
A strong- case can be made for the proposition that .. le have spent 
too much tine looking for progress in a prograr:J. in \,'bich reeasuremcnts 
are irrelevant, inaccurate, and misleading. 
But , nonetheless, the 
lHssion did try to measure itself, and in r·lay of 1967, as OCO turned 
into CORDS, produced the follo ... ring assesSl:lent of lID for the first quarter 
of 1967. 
"In truth, there has been little overall progress in RD 
activities, and the same must be said for the painful process 
of building a meaningful dialogue betlleen the government end 
the people. 
A number of factors have been reported from 
Region III to account for this unhappy situation, but they 
might well apply to the rest of the cOlUltry: 
Ita. 
The RD progre:n for 1967 involved many ne\,' and 
different concepts, command arrangements , adrlinistrative and 
procedural functions and allocation of resources . 
Only 
r ecently have the majority of provincial officials involved 
becor:'le aV.'are of the program. 
. 
"b . 
Many Ap Doi Hoi (Real Ne· ... Life Hamlets) , through 
guidance from HORD , were l ocated in fringe security areas. 
In 
most of these cases a great deal of military and jungle clear-
ing operations were necessary. 
These take time , and, as a 
result , the deployment of the RD tear;>.s often were delayed . 
"c . 
The hobbling effect of i neffectual officials 
has l'etarded the program. 
"d. 
Tbe people have had to develop new l:orking re-
lationshills ""ith the RD wOl'kers ,* the ARV11 , and the RF/PF . 
During this process, there has been a 'wait and sec ' attitude . 
*" "Horkers
t1 \faS another one of the special ,...erds the U,S , began using 
' instead of accurate translations of the Vietn~,ese. This one was 
also Lodge r s i dea. , as a more ill1derstandable \ .. ord than "cadre" to 
describe the menbers of the 59-man teams . 
135 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
I 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
nlf, however, the picture is sombre , it is not unrelieved . 
The 1967 prograo may look at this point unencouraging statisti-
cally, but its progress is of a different and more important 
sort . 
In critical areas , progress has been registered . 
There 
has evolved an implicit understanding by 'lany in the G~~ that 
RD is a longer-terc progress than hitherto believed, requiring 
a greater concentration of resources . 
In fact , there is in-
creasing evidence that programming for 1967 has so concentrated 
scarce resources i n the ll-point Ap Doi Moi that the GVN 
presence and services are spread very thin indeed in areas of' 
lower priority. 
The fact that in general each RD team will 
rena:i.n i n each hamlet for six months throughout the year , is 
a fundamental ioproveE.ent in the program. 
liAs a. result of the finer definition of tbe intent of RD 
and more interest in its possibilities , the 1967 program has 
become nore vital than its predecessors . 
This vitality has 
produced new ideas, an increasing flexibility, which narks im-
portant progre~s in the program. 
Moreover , what the country 
has been engaged in is the process of laying a base for develop-
ment ; a long draHn out process Hhich sees little initial r e\'lard, 
but without which nothing of permanence will be achieved. . 
In 
other \'!ords, the first quarter of the year has not been '-litness 
to a vital social revolution, but has inztead found evidence of 
a growing l.Ulderstanrling of the nature of' the revolution to cOOle , 
and in so doing has taken a further step in the painful process 
of building a nation . 11 !!!.I 
'-lith the f'ormation of CORDS, this history becomes current events . 
CORDS is charged nOl; with solving \'lhat have :previously been unsolvable 
problC'Jlls -- energizing the GW to do things which it is not as interested 
in as " .. e are ; ,dnning the hearts and minds of' people ",ho do not undcr-
stand us or speak our l anguage ; "lOrking under intense pressure for 
im-
mediate results in a field in \lhich success - - if possible at all -- may 
require years . 
Ide have concentrated on the history of the United States 
bureaucracy L~ this stu1y because that, in retrospect, seems to have been 
where the push for pacification came from -- not the Vietna~ese . 
'-Ie have 
not been able to analyze properly the actual course of the effort i n the 
field, ~;,her e contradictory assessments of progress have plagued the U. S. 
In the f'jllal section which follm.;s , lole try to draw a fev' lessons from 
the course of events described i n this study. 
Hhen completed, CORDS had produced a structure in 'Which, regardless 
of' civil-military tensions that cannot be wished away, all hands were 
working tOGether W1der a single chain of corr.:o.and . 
The structure was 
ma.ssive, so massive that the Vietnamese were in danger of being almost 
136 
TOP &EC~~ - Sensitive 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
forgotten --
a~d for that there can be no excuse. 
But at least the 
~lis sion was better run and better organized tha~ it had ever been 
before, and this fact nay in time l ead to a more efficient and success -
ful effort . Witnout a \mified voice in dealin..; ,dth the Vietnamese , "re 
can never hope to influence the GVN to do the things v .. e believe they . 
must do to save their own country. 
137 
i~P SECRET - Sensitive 
o 
! 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I 
• 
Oeclassified per E;<ecutive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
VI . 
FOOTNCYrES 
1. 
TlffiEJlDS THAT MET K! HOi:OLULU 
L 
Anbassador Lodge memorandum to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, 
and Ambassador Taylor, June 19, 1964 
2 . 
Message, SAIGON 1035 to \'leshington, october 6 , 1964 , EXDIS 
3. 
MAev COlllIland History, 1964, p. 68 
lL 
l·icssaee , SAIGON 1000, October 7, 1964 
5. 
l.w.CV Command History , 1964, p. 68 
6. 
J.1err:orandum, February 1966 - Report of j·leetings on Rural 
Construction , February 1-4, 1966 
7. 
Idem. 
8 . Idem. 
9. Hission Council Minut~s , September 15, 1955 
10 . 
:McGeorge Bundy memorandum for the President , February 7, 1965 
11. 
NACV Overall J.1onthly Evaluation, June 1965 
12 . 
Private Assessment of Hop Tae to Anbassador Lodge from Embassy 
Personnel, September 10, 1965 
13. 
1·li ssion Council Minutes , September 15, 1965 
14 . 
J,iission Council Minutes , July 7 , 1966 
15. 
President Johnson ' s letter to Ambassador Lodge , July 1965 
1.6. 
1·1essage, SAIGON 2761, February 1, 1966, NODI.S to the President 
17. 
President Jobnson letter to General Taylor , July 2 , 1964 
18. 
Ambassad~r Lodge quoted in memorandum for record , September 27 , 
19'55 ; Speciall.leeting in Embassy Conference Room ; p . 1 
19. 
See, for exrumple , SAIGON 4323 , August 24 , 1966, NODIS to the 
President 
138 
'rDP SECRET - Sensitive 
I)cclassificd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD D;Jtc: 20 11 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
20 . 
Ambassador Lodge memorandum dated June 19, 1964 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25 · 
26 . 
27· 
28. 
29· 
30. 
J.lessage , SAIGOn 1100, September 30, 1965 , NODIS to the President 
Message , STATE 367, August 7, 1965, to Ambassador Lodge 
Nessage , SAIGON 716, September 2, 1965, NODIS to the President 
Message, SAIGON 952, September 18, 1965, NODIS to the Pr esident 
Hessage , SAIGON 1059, October 4, 1965, NODIS to tbe President 
l-1essagc , SAIGON 1190, October 6 , 1967, NODIS to t he President 
Nessage , SAIGOIl 1273, October 13, 1965 , NODIS to the President 
!·lessage , SAIGON 1377, October 21, 1965 , NODIS to the President 
US!·i.e Historical Branch Study: "US Marine Corps Civic Action Efforts 
in Vietnam, Narch 1965-Narch 1966, " (Me History) , prepared in early 
1967 (Draft with Unnumbered Pages) . 
General Krulak, CG of Fleet Marine Force , Pacific, l-tonthly Report 
on Activities of III lID, September 1965, p . 4 
31. 
General Krula.1( t s r eport on III l·!AF, October 1965, p . 12 
32 . 
MC History (See Footnote 29) 
33 . 
Embassy POL Study of Quang Nam, February 15, 1966 , p . 5 
34 . 
Message , STATE 2087, May 26, 1964, Personal from the President 
35. 
Nessage , SAIGON 071010Z , July 7, 1964, to Secretary of State 
36 . 
Alexis Johnson l etter to Ambassador DurbrmV', November 26, 1965 ; 
Official-Informal 
37. 
"larrenton Conference Study, January 22, 1965, Annex D, par . l 
38 . 
39· 
40. 
I bid . , 
Ibid . , 
~ ., 
Annex D, 
A.TUlex D, 
Annex D, 
par . 2 
par . 9 
p . 4 
41. 
Record of l-1ission Liaison Group Neeting, prepared by Colonel Sam 
Karrick, SLO , J anuary 27, 1966 
139 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per EXecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NN O 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
1~2 . 
Harrenton Conference Report, Annex E, contains all the 
proposals brought to \']arrenton 
43. 
Warr ent '::ln Conference Report , Annex D, par . 14 
,44. 
l>fessage, STATE 951, October 4, 1965, LIMDIS 
1~5 . 
The vlashington Post editorial, February 1, 1966 
46 . 
President Johnson ' s Press Conference , February 4 , 1966 
47. 
The New York Times editorial, February 6, 1966 
1,8 . 
The Ne," York Times , Charles Nohr , Februa.ry 7, 1966 
49. 
J-1ACV Monthly Evaluation Report , 1965 
II. 
HONOLULU 
1. 
Ambassador Lodge ' s briefing to Honolulu Conference , February 1966 
2 . 
Ambassador Lodge ' s letter to Secretary Mc1lanara, l·1arch 4, 1966 
3 . 
President Johnson ' s comments to Honolulu Conference February 1966 
h . 
Secretary Rusk ' s comments to Honolulu Conference , February 1966 
5. 
Pr esident Johnson ' s comments to Honolulu Confere~ce , February 1966 
6. 
General Thang briefing to Honolulu Conference , February 7, 1966 
7. 
Honolulu Conference , Plenary Documents , February 8, 1966 
8 . 
Secretary Freemen ' s comments t o Honolulu COni'erence, February 8 , 
1966 
9 . 
President Johnson ' s co~ents to Honolulu Conf erence, Febr uary, 1966 
10. 
President Johnson ' s final statenent to Honol ulu Conference , 
Pl enary Doclunents , February 9, 1966 
11. 
De~laration of Honolulu, Part II , February 8 , 1966 
140 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
III. 
HONOLULU TO ~WIILA 
1. 
President Johnson ' s Press Conference in Saigon , February 11, 1966 
2 . 
J.lessage , STATE 2368 , February 12 , 1966 , NODIS 
3. 
Hessage, SAIGON 2365 , February 12, 1966, NODIS 
)1 . 
Message , SAIGON 2959, February 15, 1966, NODIS 
5. 
I·fission Council Hinutes , February 28 , 1966 
6 . 
Henry Kissinger l etter to Robert vI. Komer, August 8 , 1966 , 
EYES ONLY 
7 . 
Robert H. Komer paper, "Giving a New 'rhrust to Pacifi catl on , 1i 
August 7, 1956 
8 . 
J oseph Cali fano memorandum to Secretary of Defense, March 23, 1966 
EYES ONLY 
9· 
NSAl1 31'3, March 28, 1966 
10. 
Robert tL Koner memorandum to the President , April 19, 1966, p . 3 
11-
Nessage , STATE 3214, April 26, 1966 
12. 
Message , STATE 3344, Hay 7, 1966 
13. 
Nessaee, STATE 3760, June 4, 1966 
14. Message , STATE 83089, Novenber 10 , 1966 
15· 
Robert vI . Kotler memorandum to the President, April 19, 1966 
16. 
Robert \'1. Komer paper , "Giving a New Thrust to Paci fi cat i on , " 
August 7, 1966 
17. 
Robert W. Komer memorandum to the President , February 28, 1967 
1.8. 
Idem. 
19. 
PROVl'I Study Team Summary Statement , March 1966, pp . 1 - 2 
20. Ibid. , pp. 46-47 
21. 
Ibid . , p . 67 
141 
TOP SECRET. - Sengi ti ve 
• 
Oeclassified per E;<ecutive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
22. 
Ibid. 
23 . 
Ibid . 
24 . 
Nessage , l.\.ACJ33 18244 , May 12, 1966 
25. 
Priorities Ta.sk Force Sl.llllDary, July 1966 
26 . 
Ibid . 
27. 
Ibid . 
28 . 
Roles and Missions Study Group Report , p . 1 
29. 
Ibid . 
30. 
Roles and Missions study Group memorandum to Ambassador Lodge 
September 7, 1966 
31. 
Roles and Missions Study Group Report, Section V , pp . 2-4, 
August 1966 
32 . 
USAID memorandum to Ambassador Lodge, September 8 , 1966 
33. 
CIA comments on Roles and J.fissions Study Group Recommendations 
34. 
Major General Tillson (J-3, MACV) briefing to Mission Council, 
August 8, 1966 
35 . Message , SAIGON 4923, August 31, 1966, NODIS to t he President 
36 . 
J.iessage , CO~,ruSMACV to CINCPAC 260242Z, August 1966 
37. 
Ibid . 
38 . 
Draft Presidential memorandum by Secretary of Defense , 
September 15 , 1966 
39· Ibid . , State Department ' s opposition 
40. 
Ibid. , AID ' s recoomendation 
41. 
!b~ .
, JCS concurrence in idea of a Deputy COHUSMACV for RD 
42. 
Ibid. , CIA and USIA oppos ition 
43 -
Robert Yl. Komer memorandtun to Secretary J-.lcllar.lara, September 22, 
1966 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
• 
I 
I)cclassificd per ExecUlive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD D;Jtc: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
44. 
Message, STATE 61251, October 6, 1966 to Ambassador Lodge 
45. 
Mr . Katzenbacb ' s memorandum to the President, October 15 , 1966, 
"Administration of Revolutionary Development" 
46. 
Ibid. 
47. 
Secretary McNamara' s menorandum to the President , October 14, 1966 
48. Mr . George Carver ' s memorandum to Richard Helms (Director of CIA) , 
October 15, 1966, Reference Footnote 47 . 
49. 
JCSJ1- 572-66, October 11" 1966 
50 . 
The \'lashington Evening Star article on President Johnson I s 
meeting with Hhite House Press Corps , October 15, 1966 
51. 
Ward Just article, The \1ashiDgton 
52 . 
53. 
54 . 
55· 
J.1essage , 
Message , 
Message , 
Message , 
56 . 
Ibid. 
STATE 68390, October 20, 
STATE 78865, November t~ , 
SAIGON 10204, November 6, 
STATE 83699, Nov~ber 12, 
Post , October 17, 1966 
1966, NODIS 
1966 
1966, r~ODIS to the President 
1966, to Ambassador Lodge 
57 . 
l>lessage , S'l'ATE 85196 , November 15, 1966 
58 . 
Message, SAIGON 11124, November 17, 1966 , NODIS 
59. 
l.fessage , SAIGON 11125, November 17, 1966, NODIS 
60 . 
II! f.1AF SUlIII:l8Xy of 1966 Operations by FMF/Pacific , December 1966, 
p . 22 
61. 
Ibid., p . 21 
62. 
Ibid., p . 21 
63. Ibid. , p . 22 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
Declassified per EXecllti ve Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
IV. 
OCO to CORDS 
1. 
Jliessages, SAlGOH 1112!1 and 11125, 1966 (See Footnotes 58 and 59, 
of III.) above) 
2 . 
The \Olashington Post article by Ward Just, December 3 , 1966 
3 . 
Wi1iam Leonhart memorandum for the President , December 30, 1966 
4 . 
Ambassador Bunker statement in Saigon, J.fay 13, 1967 
5 . 
Ambassador Bunker Press Conference in Saigon, May 13, 1967 
6 . 
\lard Just, The t-lashington Post, 1-1ay 12, 1967 
7 . 
Uessage, SAIGON 25839, May 16 , 1967 
8 . 
Roles and l.fissions Study Group , Appendix A, August 1966 (Saigon) 
9 . 
General vlestmoreland mercorandl.uu to Ambassador Lodge, September 7, 
1966 
10. 
U. S. ?-tission Assessment of RD for 1st Quarter of 1967 (A-662 , 
Hay 12, 1<)67) 
144 
TOP SECRET - Sensitive 
