A

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

are not formidable morale problems (one manifestation of which

is desertion) within both categories of forces. These need to be
and are being tackled. However, basic point is that they do not
stem from the present system of training.

B. Mobile training teams have been Organized under special
circumstances when units have had prior combat experience and/or
as an expedient measure only. Experience has proved that units
trained by such teams have subsequently required formal training
at an established training center where proper facilities are
available. The Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps had many units
trained by mobile training teams in 1962 in order to provide an
immediate operational force. Almost all of these units have since
been retrained in the complete unit poi [program of instruction
because it was determined that the mobile team training was inade-
quate. The mobile training teams consisted of U.S. personnel and
Vietnamese interpreters.

C. While the training requirements of paramilitary forces are
relatively modest by U.S, standards, an adequate poi must be backed
up by firing ranges, training areas, class rooms, training aids and
other facilities. These requirements are met by the regional and
popular forces training centers. There are five regional force
unit training centers; nine regional force/popular force leader
training centers; and thirty-seven popular force training centers.
They are properly distributed geographically; they are staffed
with qualified Vietnamese instructors; and can be expanded, with
little difficulty to support programmed force increase. Some
augmentation of the U.S. advisory element at these several centers
is desirable, on a selected basis.

D. The concept of U.S. personnel conducting training for the
paramilitary forces on either a training center or MIT basis (and
especially the latter) is not realistic.

(1) The Vietnamese have an adequate training base with
experienced instructors; the latter are doing a satisfactory
job. For the U.S. to assume the instructional effort, vice
the Vietnamese, would generate serious morale problems and
would probably be unacceptable.

(2) The interpreter support requirements would be pro-
hibitive.

(3) Previous experience (sub-paragraph B above) of using
U.S. advisors as instructors was unsuccessful due to the
inability to communicate.

2. As indicated above, the evurrent method of training both the

regional and popular forces is adequate, although we do have
under review the length and content of the training. Where the

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
