Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

placed by the score. Almost all major military commands had changed
hands twice since the November coup and the faith of the peasants
had been shaken by disruptions in experienced leadership and loss of
physical security. : ‘

There was an increase in North Vietnamese support, and commnunica-
tion between Hanoi and the Viet Cong had increased. CHICOM 75 milli-
meter recoilless rifles and heavy machine guns were increasingly in
evidence among the Viet Cong.

The greatest source of weakness in the present situation was the
uncertain viability of the Khanh government. The greatest need, there-
fore, was to do the things that would enhance the stability of that
goverment, and at the same time provide the advice and assistance that
was necessary to increase its capabilities to deal with the problems
confronting it.

Among the alternatives considered, but rejected for the time being
(along with complete adoption of the Hilsman formulations), were overt
military pressure on North Vietnam, neutralization, return of U. S.
dependents, furnishing of a U.S. combat unit to secure the Saigon area,
and a full takeover of the command in South Vietnam by the U.S. With
respect to this last proposal, it was said that

--«the judgement of all senior people in Saigon,
with which we concur, was that the possible mili-~
tary advantages of such action would be far out-
weighed by adverse psychological impact. It would
cut across the whole basic picture of the Viet-
namese winning their own war and lay us wide open
to hostile propaganda both within South Vietnam and
outside. C4/

The areas of action that were favored and that formed the basis
of the specific recommendations to which the paper led, fell under
two major and two minor headings. The two major headings were, (1)
civil and military mobilization and (2) improvement of military forces.
The two minor headings were (1) additional military equipment for the
GVN and (2) economic actions.

The first point under civil and military mobilization was to
put the whole country on a war footing. The purpose was to main-
tain and strengthen the armed forces, to assist other national
efforts, and to remedy the recognized inequities and under-utiliza-
tion of current manpower policies. Specifically, there was proposed
a,new national mobilization plan including a national service law,
which was to be developed on an urgent basis by the Country Team in
collaboration with the Khanh Government. To this end the third of
the several: recommendations at the conclusion of the report called

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
