Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

optimism than among the senior U.S, officials in Saigon. Following
this preliminary flourish, the report gave an introductory definition
of the problem which was, in simplest terms, that the Hanoi /NLF
strategy was not to defeat GVN military forces in battle but rather
to harass and terrorize the SVN population and leadership into a
state of such demoralization that a political settlement favorable
to NVN would ensue. At that point they could proceed by stages to
the full attainment of their goals. To oppose this strategy, the
Khanh government had a complex not only of military programs, but

of social, economic, psychological and above all administrative pro-
grams. This complex of programs Taylor reported on under three
captions: "Political," "Military" and "Overall." On the political
side he reported: ‘

The most important dnd most intractable
internal problem of South Vietnam in meeting the Viet
Cong threat is the political structure at the national
level, The best thing that can be said about the Khanh
government is that it has lasted six months and has
about a 50-50 chance of lasting out the year, although
probably not without some changed faces in the Cabinet,
Although opposed by Minh and resisted less openly by
Dai Viet sympathizers among the military, Prime Minister
Khanh seems for the time being to have the necessary
military support to remain in power. However, it is an
ineffective govermnent beset by inexperienced ministers
who are also jealous and suspicious of each other...

On the positive side, Khanh seems to have allayed the
friction between Buddhists and Catholics at least for
the moment, has won the cooperation of the Hoa Hao and
Cao Dai, and has responded to our suggestions for im-
proved relations between the GVN and the U.S. mission...

«Khanh has not succeeded in building any substantial
body of active popular support in the countryside. In
the countryside...that support for the GVN exists in
direct proportion to the degree of security established
by government forces...

The intriguing inside his government and the absence
of dramatic military or political successes react upon
Khanh,,.moody...subjective to fits of despondency., See-
ing the slow course of the counterinsurgency campaign
frustrated by the weakness of his government, Khanh has
turned to the "march north" theme’ to unify the home
front and to offset the war weariness which he asserts
is oppressing his people and his forces.... 113/

The state of mind of Khanh and his colleagues would be an impor-
tant factor in the future conduct of the war, Taylor judged,

89 — TOP SECRET -~ Sensitive
