Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

honest feelings (the Saigon Mission, it was once said by Barry Zorthian,
could not keep a secret 24 hours), the stories from Saigon do reflect
what the Mission thought in the days just after Honolulu. The editori-
als and columnists from Washington indicate to what degree the Adminis-
tration succeeded in convincing the press corps (which is not, of :
course, the U.S. public) that the emphasis at Honolulu was really on
pacification.

EDITORIAL: The New York Herald Tribune, February 8:

"The meeting presents the prospect of our resuming the
war in more favorable circumstances. The meeting of the
heads of the American and South Vietnamese governments is
a fresh and stronger demonstration of mutual confidence,

On this basis they can now proceed to mount measures for
dealing with the equally important military and civilian
aspects of the war.

“The two are intimately related...the loyalty and sup-
port of the peasants in the interior are essential, Presi-
dent Johnson is bidding for them by offering some of the
benefits of his Great Society program to the South Vietnamese.
It will not be easy, in time of war,...but...they must be
pursued with the same vigor as we press the war on the
pattlefield."

EDITORIAL: - The Washington Evening Star, February 7:

"It is particularly significant that the American
delegation included HEW Secretary Gardner and Orville
Freeman, Secretary of Agriculture. Their presence cer-
teinly means that a greater ‘pacification’ effort will be
made as the fighting goes on..."

COLUMNIST: Marquis Childs, February 9 (from Honolulu)

"This conference called by President Johnson is a
large blue chip put on the survival value of the wiry,
exuberant Air Vice Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky, and the generals
who rule with him. It is expected that Ky will not only
survive but that with massive economic help from the U.S.
the national leadership committee will eventually win the
support of the peasant in the countryside...Any sensible
bookmaker would quote long odds against the bet paying off.
But after so many false starts this seems to be the right
direction -- a determined drive to raise the level of living
in the countryside and close the gap of indifference and
hostility between the peasant and the sophisticated city
dweller...Over and over we have been told that only by
winning the hearts and minds of the Vietnamese people will

“6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
