109.

110.

Lil.

lie,

113.

14.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The present acute crisis prevents successful debate on
the European Defense Community (EDC) proposal in the
French Parliament. Any attempt to force a vote would
lead to postponement or defeat of EDC. iIf the Laniel
government falls because of Indochina, EDC will likely

get buried for good. Paris 4440 to Dulles, 19 May 1954...... 472

Secretary Stevens emphasizes the Army's concern over
high-level official views that "air and sea forces
alone could solve our problems in Indochina" and that
the complex nature of these problems would require a
major logistical effort -- "it explodes the myth that
air and sea forces could solve the Indochina problems."
Secretary of the Army Memorandum for Secretary of

Pearse, VO May LOO sais ou swcslsisloo esis aie 60's was aw'se culviss'e viwelsere 475

The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that U.S, military
participation in Indochina be limited primarily to
navel and air forces. JCS Memorandum for Secretary

Of Defense, 21 May LOM cusvewwa cows Gevcvwecmenercncerccence HIT

The JCS recommend against a "Korea-type" defense of
Southeast Asia as unsound. Accordingly, the U.S.
"should adopt the concept of offensive actions
against the 'military power of the aggressor,’ (in
this instance, Communist China) rather than local
reaction to the attack. JCS Memorandum for Secretary

Of Hefense, 21 May LOSH. < oxu welscw.weclisisicwaieeiime walvievene cowie sis

General Smith cannot understand why the JCS down-
graded U.S. military representation on the five-
power staff conference because the Russians and
Chinese must have known "we really intended serious

business.” DULTE 100, 23) May 195! < ccvws ace cece cuscn secs

The U.S. feels,as a minimum, France and Vietnam should
Sign draft Treaty of Independence, France should indi-
cate "equal and sovereign” status of French Union
states, and declare withdrawal cf French Expeditionary
Forces as soon as possible. Dulles to Paris 4272,

EISELE Net RAS gE dr pan a ECT ay EMER ETE Tn CRT Ree

The JCS point out their belief that, from the U.S. point
of view with reference to the Far East,"Indochina is
devoid of decisive military objectives and allocation of
more than token U.S. armed forces in Indochina would be
a serious diversion of limited U.S. capabilities."

JCS Memorandum for Secretary of Defense, 26 May 1954.....

Bin TOP SECRET

480

1832

hgh

eee

487

- Sensitive
