Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

activities there either dominated or simply excluded the French. Several
forces converged to produce this change in U.S. policy. Resolution of
differences within the Eisenhower Administration on military issues
opened the way for U.S. assumption of responsibilities in what had been
an exclusively French preserve. The belief that Diem for all his
failings and weaknesses was the only available leader for South Vietnam,
and that he needed stronger U.S. and French support to quell opponents
and speed development led to the creation of programs designed to
provide that strong support.

; ; Finally, the U.S. believed France had not done enough for
Diem, believed the schizophrenic French policy of professing support
While acting to undermine Diem's regime was largely to blame for
Vietnamese difficulties. This resulted in demands that France live
up to her promises. It made unilateral American efforts more attractive
-- French assistance might not be available in any case -- and it
inspired a feeling that Americans had to do more because the French
were doing so little. ;

C. Tentative U.S. Involvement Becomes Deeper, Firmer

1. Adoption of Military Responsibilities

Authorization for General John (Iron Mike) O'Daniel, Chief
of the Military Assistance and Advisory Group (MAAG), Indochina, to take
up the task of training the Vietnamese National Army (VNA) was long in
coming. General O'Daniel and French General Ely had discussed U.S.
participation in training in June 1954; O'Daniel drew up a comprehensive
plan for advisory assistance at all levels of the military establish-
ment and in July begged the U.S. to beef up the MAAG staff before
August 11, when the Geneva prohibition against introduction of new
military personnel went into effect. ah/ But the Joint Chiefs of
Staff objected.

a. The JCS Arguments Against U.S. Training the VNA

Early in August, the JCS listed four preconditions
essential to the success of a U.S. training effort in Indochina,
preconditions which should be met before training obligations were
assumed. First:

Tt is absolutely essential that there be a reasonably
strong, stable civil government in control. It is hope-
less to expect a US military training mission to achieve
success unless the nation concerned is able effectively
to perform those goverrmental functions essential to the
successful raising and maintenance of armed forces.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
