Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. The McNamara Bombing Options

long before McNamara received these views from the Chiefs,
CIA and State, however, he had requested comments from several quarters
on two possible bombing programs. Perhaps reflecting a cool Presidential
reaction to the DPM proposals, Secretary McNamara, on May 20, asked the
JCS, the CIA, and the two military services involved in the ROLLING
THUNDER program, the Air Force and the Navy, to study the question. He
referred to the "controversy" surrounding the program, said that several
alternatives had been suggested, and asked for an analysis of the two
most promising ones:

(1) Concentrate on LOCs in the Panhandle area, Route
Packages 1, 2, and 3, and terminate bombing in the rest of
North Vietnam unless there is reconstruction of important
fixed targets destroyed by prior raids or unless new mili-
tary actions appear; or

(2) Terminate bombing against fixed targets not
directly associated with LOCs in Route Packages 6a and
6b [the northeast quadrant] and simultaneously expand armed
reconnaissance in Route Packages 6a and 6b by authorizing
strikes against all LOCs except within 8 miles of the
centers of Hanoi and Haiphong. This would undoubtedly
require continuous strikes against MIG aircraft on all
airfields. 136/

Under alternative (2) above, the Secretary provided two alternate
assumptions: (a) that strikes against the ports and port facilities
were precluded, and (bo) that every effort was made to deny importation
from the sea. 137/

The Secretary asked each addressee to analyze the two main
alternatives plus any others they considered worth discussing. He asked,
for each of the alternatives, the effect it would have on reducing the
flow of men and material to SVN, on losses of pilots and aircraft, and
‘on the risk of “increased military pressure" from the USSR or China.

He also asked that the studies be carried out independently, and requested

reports by 1 June. 138/

The CIA reply, a "Dear Bob" memo from Helms, arrived as
requested on June Ast. In his cover memo Helms stated that the goal
of interdicting supplies to the South was essentially beyond reach:

In general, we do not believe that any of the programs
presented in your memorandum is capable of reducing the flow
of military and other essential goods sufficiently to
affect the war in the South or to decrease Hanoi's deter-
mination to persist in the war. 139/

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
