Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(5) No provision that would "exclude the possibility of
the ultimate reunification of Vietnam by peaceful means”;

(6) Provision for "the peaceful and humane transfer,
under international supervision, of those people desiring to be moved
from one zone to another of Vietnam";

(7) Provision for "effective machinery for international
supervision of the agreement."

d. British Adherence to Seven Points Remains Doubtful

Although agreement to the seven points represented some-
thing of an American diplomatic victory (with the important exception
of point 2, where the U.S. for the first time conceded that partition
was inescapable), the U.S. was by no means confident that the British
would actually abide by the relatively hard bargaining lines set forth.
". . + We have the distinct impression,” Dulles wrote, "that the British
look upon this /memorandum of the seven points7 merely as an optimum
solution and that they would not encourage the French to hold out for a
solution as good as this," The Secretary observed that the British,
during the talks, had settled for agreement to "respect" the final terms;
they preferred something stronger, and in fact "wanted to express these
7 points merely as a 'hope' without any indication of firmness on our
part. " The U.S., quite aside from what was said in the seven points,
"would not want to be associated in any way with a settlement which
fell materially short of the 7 point memorandum." 13/ The possibility
of a unilateral withdrawal was still being "given consideration," Dulles
reported, 14/ even as the seven points were agreed wpon.

a

e, French Generally Concur with Seven Points

Despite reservations about the feasibility of implementing
the seven points, the U.S. hoped to get French approval of: them. On
6 July Dillon telegraphed the French reaction as given him by Parodi,
the Secretary-General of the cabinet. With the exception of point 5
dealing with elections, the French were in agreement. They were confused
about an apparent conflict between the elections provision and point 4,
under which political provisions, which would include elections, were not
to risk ee of retained Vietnam. In addition, they felt U.S. intention
merely to "respect" any agreement was too weak a term, and requested
clarification of its meaning. 15/

Dulles responded the next day to both matters. Points 4 and
5 were not in conflict, he said. It was quite possible that an agree-
ment in line with the seven points might still not prevent Indochina
from going communist. The important thing, therefore, was to arrange
for national elections in a way that would give the South Vietnamese a

A-38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
