Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -. Sensitive

TIT

THE U.S. ENTERS THE WAR:

Flaming Dart to the Steady Influx of U.S. Forces, June, 1965
1. "Phase II" Begins and Coups Continue, February, 1965

While the Embassy stood by doing what little it could to undercut
Khanh's personal position, VC attacks on the American advisors’ barracks
at Pleiku, and on three other installations, provided the pretext for
US/VNAF bombing attacks on infiltration staging areas in the southern-
most province of North Vietnam, February 7-8. Acting Prime Minister Oanh
spoke for GVN during the coordination of the attacks and announcements.
(The raids were called reprisals, as was the subsequent raid on February 12
following the attacks on the American barracks at Quihon.) U.S. dependents
were ordered to leave SVN. 1

McGeorge Bundy was in town, and in keeping with the going tactics,
stayed at arms length from Khanh, though meeting him and the generals socially.
As an aside at this point, Taylor gave one last bow to the idea that cutting
off the flow of help from the North would turn the tide of the war against
the VC: He remarked that perhaps the smell of victory within six months
would now lead Khanh to take over again.

On his return to Washington, McGeorge Bundy wrote a Memorandum
to the President, dated February 7, 1965. ‘In evaluating the U.S. team
and policy, he stated, "U.S. mission is composed of outstanding men and
U.S. policy within Vietmam is mainly right and well directed." However,
he proceeded to point cut two important differences between his current
assessment and that of the misSion. Taylor had concluded that: (1) the
Khanh government was impossible to work with, and (2) the Buddhists (Khanh's
ally in the recent struggle) must be confronted and faced down, using force
if necessary. Bundy disagreed on both points, stating thet Khanh was still
the best hope in sight in terms of pursuing the fight against the communists
and that the Buddhists should be accommodated and incorporated rather than
confronted - :

With respect to the scheduled reprisal actions, he stated, "for
immediate purposes, and especially for the initiation of reprisal policy,
we believe the government need be no stronger than it is today with General
Khanh as the focus of raw power, while a weak caretaker government goes
through the motions. Such a government can execute military decisions
and it can give formal political support to joint US-GVN policy. That is
about all it can do." He further stated that reprisal actions themselves

65 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
