Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(4) the logistic implications and the discussion of any problem areas
which they (MACV) enticipated in meeting them. 25/

On 26 March COMUSMACV submitted to the CINCPAC Requirements Task
Group a detailed troop listing for the 2-1/3 division "minimum essential
force." Other than providing a detailed list of TO&'s and unit small
strengths, the document provides little of interest. It did stipulate
that the northern portion of the minimum essential force would be directed
toward an expanded infiltration interdiction mission and that the southern
portion of the force would pursue "presently prescribed operations." 26/

In a follow-up message to the Task Requirements Group on the 28th
of March *COMUSMACV again commented on the restrictive aspects of Program }. 27/
This in turn was picked up and amplified by CINCPAC in a message to the JCS
on the same day. 28/ CINCPAC pointed out that as of 9 March 1967 Program }
was 38,241 spaces short of full implementation and that this figure included
spaces for five battalions or their equivalents which could not be considered
for trade-off purposes. All of these spaces, especially the battalion
equivalents, were significant elements when considered within the perspec-
tive of MACV's operational requirements and could not be deleted without
seriously impairing MACV capability to achieve its objectives. In light
of this shortfall in Program 4 CINCPAC requested that the JCS reconsider
its earlier proposal that a 4th rifle company be added to all U.S. Army
infantry battalions in Vietnam. The logic behind such a raise in program
ceiling which would increase materially the combat power and effectiveness
of the infantry without increasing unit overhead was irrefutable in
CINCPAC's eyes. CINCPAC proposed that the addition of the rifle companies,
a total of 8,821 men, be added to the Program 4 ceiling for a total of
479,231 of all services. The space requirements for the 2-1/3 division
minimum essential force reflected in the COMUSMACV request would then be
added on to the adjusted Program 4 total of 479,000. However, in the event
that any or all of the spaces reflected in that 479,000 were not approved
or that the package itself would be reduced, the Pacific Commander predicted
grave curtailment in MACV operations and a danger that the operational
objectives set for the force requirements initially would not be achieved.

By 28 March the JCS through the CINCPAC group had the detailed
justification and planning calculations for the COMUSMACV 67 force require-
ments in hand. MACV had added little that was new in the way of strategic
concept other than to reaffirm their intention to concentrate on certain
priority areas in each corps tactical zone. Priority areas themselves were
selected because they seemed best suited to achieve destruction or neutral-
ization of enemy main forces and bases -- persistently prime MACV goals.
Despite this strong declaration of intent MACV hedged by noting that "the
, enemy will be struck wherever he presents a lucrative target." 29/ Forces
would also be maintained by MACV outside the priority areas to contain the
enemy in his out of country sanctuaries. In this connection, the planners
anticipated that there would be large scale offensive operations continu-
ously conducted during FY 68 to detect and destroy infiltration or invasion
forces in the DMZ-Hishland Border regions.

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
