Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Yi
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

improving and promised to continue. Most programs underway were moving
forward, as the statistical indicators clearly demonstrated. Those
directly related to prosecution of the counterinsurgency effort showed
measurable advances being made toward winning the war. Programs for ex-
panding and improving RVNAF capability were likewise coming along well,
and in most cases, were ahead of schedule. Confidence and optimism pre-
vailed. .

Impressed, Mr. McNamara, acknowledged that the "tremendous progress"
in the past six months was gratifying. He noted, however, that these
achievements had been the result of short-term ad hoc actions on a crash
basis. What was needed now was to conceive a long-range concerted pro-
gram of systematic measures for training and equipping the RVNAF and for
phasing out major U.S. advisory and logistic support activities. The
Secretary then asked how long a period it would take before the VC could
be expected to be eliminated as a significant force. COMUSMACV, in reply
to the direct question, estimated about one year from the time the RVNAF,
the Civil Guard, and the Self-Defense Corps became fully operational and
began to press the VC in all areas.

The Secretary said that a conservative view had to be taken and to
assume it would take three years instead of one, that is, by the latter
part of 1965. He observed that it might be difficult to retain public
support for U.S. operations in Vietnam indefinitely. Political pressures
would build wp as losses continued. Therefore, he concluded, planning
must be undertaken now and a program devised to phase out U.S. military
involvement. He, therefore, directed that a comprehensive long-range
program be developed for building up South Vietnamese military capability
for taking over defense responsibilities and phasing out the U.S. role,
assuming that it would require approximately three years (end 1965) for
the RVNAF to be trained to the point that they could cope with the VC.
The program was to include training requirements, equipment requirements,
U.S. advisory requirements, and U.S. units.

For the record, the formulation of the decisions made and the direc-
tives for action to be taken resulting from the Conference was as follows:

a. Prepare plans for the gradual scaling down of USMACV
during the next 3-year period, eliminating U.S. units
and detachments as Vietnamese were trained to perform
their functions.

b. Prepare programs with the objective of giving South
Vietnam an adequate military capability without the
need for special U.S. military assistance, to include
(1) a long-range training program to establish an
officer corps able to manage GVN military operations,
and (2) a long-range program and requirements to provide
the necessary materiel to make possible a turnover to

pe RVNAF three years from July 1962.

ye TOP SECRET - Sensitive
