Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in the military, political and logistic fields if a
larger force goes into operation. In effect, an attack
on central and lower Laos would mean the opening of
another front nearer to North Vietnam, and then the

US troops would have to clash with the North Vietnamese
main force." In essence, a brigade will beget a division
and a division a corps, each calling down matching forces
from North Vietnam into territory to their liking and
suggesting to Hanoi that they take action in Northern
Laos to suck us further in. We would simply have a wider
war, with Souvanna back in Paris, world opinion against
us, and no solution either to the wider war or to the

one we already have in Vietnam.

Those are the likely costs and risks of COURSE A.
They are, we believe, both unacceptable and unnecessary.
Ground action in North Vietnam, because of its escalatory
potential, is clearly unwise despite the open invitation
and temptation posed by enemy troops operating freely
' back and forth across the DMZ. Yet we believe that, short
of threatening and perhaps toppling the Hanoi regime
itself, pressure against the North will, if anything,
harden Hanoi's unwillingness to talk and her settlement
terms if she does. China, we believe, will oppose settle-
ment throughout. We believe that there is a chance that
the Soviets, at the brink, will exert efforts to bring
about peace; but we believe also that intensified bombing
and harbor-mining, even if coupled with political pressure
from Moscow, will neither bring Hanoi to negotiate nor
affect North Vietnam's terms.

B. Analysis of Course B

As of March 18, 1967, the approved US Force Structure
(Program 4) for Southeast Asia provided for 87 maneuver
battalions, 42 air squadrons, and a total strength of
468,000 men. Based on current forecasts of enemy strength,
under COURSE B it should not be necessary to approve now
for deployment more than 9 of the 24 available maneuver
pattalions and none of the air squadrons -- a total of
approximately 30,000 men including appropriate land and
sea support forces (see Attachment III).

This approach would be based, first, on General
Westmoreland's statement that "without /his requested/

159 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
