33

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

THR ATR WAR IN NORTH VIETNAM

T. JULY 1965 TO THE YEAR-END BOMBING PAUSE
hs Introduction -- Where We Stood At Mid-Summer

By the summer of 1965, a U.S.. campaign of sustained, almost
daily air strikes against NVN was well underway, with token GVN partici-
pation. Most of the important bombing policy issues had been settled,
and the general outlines of the campaign had become clear. Military
proposals to seek &@ duick and decisive solution to the Vietnam War
through bombing NVN -- proposals which called for an intensive campaign
+o apply maximum practicable military pressure in a short time -- had
been entertained and rejected. Instead, what was undertaken was a
graduated program, nicknamed ROLLING THUNDER, definitely ascending in
tempo and posing a potential threat of heavy bombing pressure, but
starting low and stretching out over a prolonged period.

U.S. decision-makers apparently accepted the military view
that a limited, gradual program would exert less pressure upon NVN than
a program of heavy bombing from the outset, and they apparently granted
that less pressure was less likely to get NVN to scale down or call off
the insurgency, or enter into reasonable negotiations. They felt, how-
ever, that all-out bombing would pose far greater risks of widening the
war, would transmit a signal strength out of all proportion to the limited
objectives and intentions of the U.S. in Southeast Asia, would carry
unacceptable political penalties, and would perhaps foreclose the promise
of achieving U.S. goals at a relatively low level of violence.

The decision-makers accordingly elected to proceed with the
bombing in a slow, steady, deliberate manner, beginning with a few
infiltration-associated.targets in southern NVN and gradually moving
northward with progressively more severe attacks on a wider variety of
targets. The pattern adopted was designed to preserve the options to
proceed or not, escalate or not, or quicken the pace or not, depending
on NVN's reactions. The carrot of stopping the bombing was deemed as
important 2s the stick of continuing it, and bombing pauses were provided
Tt was hoped that this track of major military escalation of the

oP oue be accompanied by a parallel diplomatic track to bring th

war

war to an end, and that both tracks could be coordinated. :

By the summer of 1965, bombing NVN had also been relegated
to a secondary role in U.S. military strategy for dealing with the war.
Farlier expectations that bombing and other pressures on NVN would

al TOP SECRET - Sensitive
