Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

Moreover, almost as soon as the truce became effective, the Catholic
bishops entered into a test of power with the Viet Minh, using their
"self-defense forces" to balk DRV occupation. The response was pre-
dictably ruthless: Catholic villages were attacked by PAVN troops,

and in two instances, inhabitants reportedly were massacred; churches
were burned, Church property confiscated, priests tortured or jailed, and
heavy taxes levied on Church lands and buildings. Among the consequences
of that violence was a Catholic propaganda campaign against the Viet
Minh =~ e.g., the-Virgin-had-gone-South theme -- and mass migrations of
whole parishes. 46

kh. Exodus: Test of Geneva

The movement of refugees from North Vietnam quickly became
a central point of international controversy. Both parties to the
Geneva Agreement accused the other of violations in impeding the free
egress of would-be migrants, and both sides were undoubtedly at least
partially justified in their charges. Aside from the propaganda campaign,
France -- with substantial American aid ~-- helped refugees with food,
medicine, and transportation. American and French ships moved whole
villages southward, and American and French charities provided for their
well-being during the journey and after their arrival in their new home-
land. The U.S. Government, besides assigning a Task Force of the Seventh
Fleet to refugee assistance, furnished the Saigon Government with $56,000,000
in 1955, and $37,000,000 in 1956 for refugee relief and resettlement con-
sidering the outflow from North Vietnam "a convincing tribute to the Free
World and an indictment of the Communists." At the same time, both the
GVN and the U.S. actively discouraged migration from the South -- the GVN
mainly by administrative obfuscation, the U.S. primarily through another
propaganda campaign, targeted against Viet Minh in South Vietnam. 47

DRV behavior toward refugees during the year in which "regroup=
ment" was authorized has served then and since as an indictment of its
character, and proof that it could not be expected to permit free elections.
leo Cherne of Look, and Dr. Tom Dooley dramatized the misery and fearfulness
of the refugees for American audiences. 48/ Ngo Dinh Diem utilized
refugees systematically to mobilize opinion in South Vietnam against Geneva,
the ICC, and the DRV as well. 49/ Since the issue has become central to
the American policy debate on Vietnam, Frank N. Trager, for example, has
stated that, after the DRV perceived that the numbers moving south by far
exceeded those coming north, the DRV was impelled to: 50/

",..impose restrictions and brutal punishments on those
who sought to go South. Summary arrests, denial of permits,
intimidation by 'show trials' of those who served as leaders of
the exodus, and executions served to inhibit the exercise of the
option. Residual petitions affecting 95,000 persons in the North
were presented to the International Control Commission. Nothing
ever came of these. An unknown number were thus never allowed to

12 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
