Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

militery pressures. we were able to revise their assessment that they could
win "without much risk of having to feel the weight of U.S. response." 36/

Apparently as a result of these criticisms and their influence
on other Working Group members, the Group's final assessment of DRV
suse Speen alety to military pressures was somewhat modified. While con~
tinuing to emphasize that affecting Hanoi's will was important, the crit-
icality of it was obscured by concessions to the possible impact of
damage to DRV capabilities and by greater reliance on conditional phras-
ing. For example:

"She nature of the war in Vietnem is such that U.S, ability
to compel the DRV to end or reduce the VC insurrection rests
essentially upon the effect of the U.S. sanctions on the will
of DRV leadership to sustain and enlarge that insurrection, and
to a lesser extent upon the effect of sanctions on the eapabili-
ties of the DRV to do so."

Although giving explicit recognition to "a rising rate of infiltration,"
and continuing to acknowledge limits to U.S. abilities to prevent the
DRV's material support for the VC, the assessment stated that "U.S.-
inflicted destruction in North Vietnam and Laos would reduce these sup-
porting increments and damage DRV/VC morale.” It qualified this state-
ment, however, by pointing out that the degree to which such damage
mould provide the GVN with a breathing spell would depend largely on
“whether any DRV 'removal’ of its direction and support of the VC were
superficial or whole." If superficial or "limited to gestures...that
removed only the more visible evidences of the DRV increment," the
report continued, "it would probably not be possible to develon @ viable
end free government in South Vietnam." 37/

In general, the final assessment of DRV susceptibility to
pressures was less discouraging than the intelligence panel's initial
submission, although it could not be considered particularly encouraging
either. The reference to U.S. "policy flexibility,” to which the JCS
took such violent objection, was removed, and the following non-committing
statement was used instead: "Hanoi's immediate estimate is probably that
the passing of the U.S. election gives Washington the opportunity to take
new military actions against the DRV and/or new diplomatic initiatives."
If new military pressures were applied, the report indicated that Hanoi's
leaders would be faced with a basic question: "Is the U.S. determined
to continue escalating its pressures to achieve its announced objectives
-»-or is the U.S. escalation essentially 2 limited attempt to improve the
U.S. negotiating position?" It continued:

"Their decision...would be affected by the U.S. military
posture in the area, by the extent and nature of the U.S.
escalation, the character of the U.S. communication of its
intentions, and their reading of domestic U.S. and inter-
nec iene reactions to the inauguration of U.S. attacks on the
North.

‘10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
