Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. World War II and the Viet Minh

(1) Formation of the Independence League, 1941

The fall of France in June 1940 was followed immediately

by a Japanese demand for permission to occupy Indochina. On 19 June 190,
Japan presented the French the first of a series of ultimatums, which cul-
minated, after some ungraceful maneuvering by the Vichy government, in

an order signed September 2, 1940, by Marshall Petain, directing the
colonial administration to negotiate terms by which Japanese armed forces
might enter Indochina and use military bases there. Within the month,
after demonstrations by the Japanese Navy off the Tonkin coast, and an
actual invasion of Tonkin from China by the Japanese Army, the terms sought
by the Japanese were forthcoming. The French ruled in Vietnam as hosts

to the Japanese until 1945, but the presence of Japanese bayonets rendered
their sovereignty largely titular. The Vichy administration under Rice
Admiral Jean Decouz developed a peculiarly Indochinese French nationalism
which dignified its client status, extolled France's tutelage functions
for the Vietnamese, and foreclosed any concessions whatever to native
aspirations for political independence. Above all, it attempted to pre-
serve the fiction that the Japanese had been stationed in Indochina with
its permission. Admiral Decoux held that:

"A country is not occupied if it keeps its own army free
in its movements, if its government and all the wheels of its
administration function freely and without impediment, if its
general services and particularly its police and security forces
remain firmly in the hands of the sovereign authority and out-
side of all foreign interference." 11/

But, the very emphasis the Vichy government placed upon its "freedom" dra-
matized among Viet patriots the extent of its collaboration. I+ was soon
evident that the Decoux regime served the purposes of Japanese policy, and
was "free" only to the degree the Japanese chose. Early in 1941 Japan
countenanced a Thai invasion of laos and Cambodia. French military actin
was successful in halting the Thais, but the Japanese, requiring Thai co-
operation for their drive into Malaya, forced the French to grant Thailand
all the territory it sought. On May 6, 1961, the first of a series of
Franco-Japanese commercial treaties was signed, which had the effect of
diverting from France to Japan all the exploitive gains from French colonial
enterprise, without Indochina's receiving in return such goods as it nor-
mally received in trade from France. Japanese armed forces were granted
full run of the country, and after December 7, 1941, Decoux declared Indo-
china part of the "Greater East Asia, Co-Prosperity Sphere."

The Japanese entry into Indochina kindled, in 1940 ana 1941, Vietnamese
insurrections against the French, who now appeared more reprehensible and
vulnerable than ever. Too, some Vietnamese nationalists had long looked
to the Japanese to liberate their nation. The communists were apparently
undecided whether to risk another premature insurrection. While it appears

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-18
