Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

basis from personnel provided by interested agencies. The
Deputy Ambassador to be relieved of routine duties and to
spend substantially all his time on rural construction
duties...

The State Department proposed a "Central Pacification
Organization" which would have been not more than a
coordinating committee for the existing agencies. h2/

What these reorganization proposals seem to suggest, in light of
the ultimate direction that the Mission took, is that when agencies
are asked to produce suggestions which may reduce or inhibit their
prerogatives, they are unlikely to do so in a manner responsive to
the requirements of their politically-appointed chieftains. The
prerogetives and privileges of the agencies inevitably come first.
One does not reorganize voluntarily; the impetus comes from without,
This is also seen in the different attitude that the reorganizers
had towards Washington and Saigon. Although the same problem in
coordination existed (and still exists) in Washington as in Saigon,
the Washington officials always were ready to tell Saigon how to
clean up its house, but were slow to suggest self-improvements. At
Warrenton, perhaps prodded by the Saigon representatives, they did
take note of the matter, although they were reluctant to suggest a
clear solution:

"Note was also taken of the inadequacy of present
U.S. Government machinery to handle Vietnam problems
quickly and decisively. The need for referral of too
large a mumber of problems to the Secretarial level was
one of the problems mentioned. While the meeting did not
have time to come to any firm conclusions, there was a
view that the VNCC because of its coordinating, rather than
decision-cum-enforcement powers could not perform this task
except in part. If endowing the VNCC or its Chairman with
larger powers, and with a staff associated with no one agency,
is not a feasible solution, it was considered that the
required directing position might have to be set up at a
higher level, perhaps related to the National Security
Council." 43/

In the Warrenton report, then, all the events of the coming year
were foreshadowed, and, reading between the lines, one can now see
what was coming., Unfortunately, and obviously, this was not the
ease at the time--particularly for the Mission in Saigon.

27 TOP 'SECRET - Sensitive
