Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

119-

TOP SECRET -— Sensitive

up a "provisional government’ like Xieng Khueng (though less
legitimate appearing) in the very Kontum area into which the
present initial plan would move SEATO forces. If the Viet Cong
movement 'blooms' in this way, it will almost certainly attract
all the back-the-winner sentiment that understandably prevails
in such cases and that beat the French in early 1954 and came
within an ace of beating Diem in early 1955. ji

An early and hard-hitting operation has a good chance (70%
would be my guess) of arresting things and giving Diem a chance
to do better and clean up. Even if we follow up hard, on the
lines the JCS are working out after yesterday's meeting, however,
the chances are not much better that we will in fact be able to
clean up the situation. It all depends on Diem's effectiveness,
which is very problematical. The 30% chance is that we would
wind up like the French in 1954; white men can't win this kind
of fight. ;

On a 70-30 basis, I would myself favor going in. But if we
let, say,a month go by before we move, the odds will slide (both
short-term shock effect and long-term chance) down to 60-40, 50-50
and so on. Laos under a Souvanna Phouma deal is more likely than
not to go sour, and will more and more make things difficult in
South Viet-Nam, which egain underscores the element of time. 8/

Minutes of the NSC meeting of October 11 were not available for this study.
But we have the following Gilpatric memorandum for the record. (The JUNGLE JIM
squadron -- 12 planes -- was an Air Force wnit specially trained for counter-
insurgency warfare. Short of engaging in combat itself, presumably it would
be used to train Vietnamese pilots):

At this morning's meeting with the President the following
course of action was agreed upon with relation to South Vietnam:

1. The Defense Department is authorized to send the
Air Force's Jungle Jim Squadron into Vietnam to serve under the
MAAG as a training mission and not for combat at the present time.

2. General Maxwell Taylor accompanied by Dr. Rostow
from the White House, General Lansdale, a representative of JCS,
Mr. Cottrell from State and probably someone from ISA will leave
for Vietnam over the weekend on a Presidential mission (to be
announced by the President at this afternoon's press conference
as an economic survey) to look into the feasibility from both
political and military standpoints of the following:

Oy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
