Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

needed with the GV. The Ambassador replied by suggesting certain details
of the message he would propose passing to the Saigon goverment. In
effect these called for the GVN to agree, to the kind of internal policies
and command arrangements suggested in his briefing, in return for a
prompt U.S. implementation of "Option A plus” and acknowledgment of the
intention to go further if the GYN stabilized itself. 133/ It is in-
portant to note that the official memorandum of the foregoing discussion
implies agreement among the Principals that Option A plus early stages

of C should be recommended. The memorandum states, "It was urged that
«oe and "to get what improvements we could it was thought that we should
move into some parts of C soon."

There followed a discussion of the infiltration evidence, during
which Mr. McCone indicated that an intelligence team had made a further
investigation of it,

"It was agreed that State and Defense should check state-
ments made by Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, and General
Wheeler on this subject, so that these could be related to
the previous MACV and other estimates and a full explanation
develoved of how these earlier estimates had been made and
why they had been wrong in the light of fuller evidence." 134/

Before the meeting adjourned (with egreement to meet again the
next day), Ambassador Taylor raised a number of questions which he
thought the Working Group papers had not covered adequately (TAB B).

Only a few received answers during the meeting, and he agreed to furnish
the Principals with the complete list. However, it was indicated that
Option B or C could be initiated from a "standing start" -- presumably
with no incidents necessarily occurring first. The GVN were acknowledged
to have "plenty of capabilities" to participate -- even before arriving
at the intended four-souadron strength of A-1 aircraft. It was stressed
that the VNAF role would be in North Vietnam only -- not in Laos -- and
Secretary McNamara indicated a strong role for them against targets below
the 19th Parallel. Finally, a time-span of three to six months was indi-
cated as the expected duration for Option C. 135/

On the following day, when the Principals reassembled, William
Bundy circulated a draft scenario of actions proposed in the event a
decision were made to undertake measures like those contained in Option A.
It had been agreed at the end of the initial meeting that these would
be reviewed by the group with the assumption that they could be imple-
mented "with or without a decision to move into the full Option C program
at some time thereafter." 136/ (It is importent to note how readily the
attention of the Principals focused on the similerity of preparatory
actions and early military measures in the various options, apparently
without resard to the particular negotiating rationale which each option
incorporated, ) Bundy's scenario of early military, political and diplo-
matic actions was based on a similar assumption "that a decision is or
is not /going to be/ taken to go on with Option C thereafter if Hanoi does

Pane TOP SECRET - Sensitive
