Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"We say to the representatives of the capitalist world:
"you are for the development of capitalism. We are for
socialism. We do not want to impose our institutions on
you, but we will not allow you to interfere in our affairs.
Therefore, there is only one way open to us -- peaceful
competition.’ 153/

The Soviet softening, taken with the U.K. position, plus Diem's success~-
ful elections in March, 1956, seemed to write off action by the Geneva
powers, and evidently caused serious reconsideration by the Isao Dong
leaders. On 24 April 1956, Ho Chi Minh issued a statement reporting
on the Ninth Plenum of the Central Committee of the Lao Dong Party,
in which, in Hanoi's ca. 1960 version, he held that:

" . . . We have grasped the great significance of the
Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
This Congress has:

"Analyzed the new sitvation prevailing in the world, and
pointed out the new conditions favorable to the preservation
of peace and the advance toward socialism by the Revolutionary
Parties of the working class and the laboring people;

"Clearly shown the Soviet Union's victorious road,
giving us still greater enthusiasm and making us believe still
more strongly in the invincible forces of the Soviet Union,
the bastion of revolution and of world peace;

"Pointed out the tasks of the Communist Party in the
ideological and organizational fields. The Congress
particularly emphasized the application of Marxist-Leninist
principles to collective leadership and opposed the cult of
the individual.

"While recognizing that war may be averted, we must be
vigilant to detect the warmongers’ schemes; for as long as
imperialism exists, the danger of war still exists.

"While recognizing that in certain countries the road
to socialism may be a peaceful one, we should be aware of
this fact: In countries where the machinery of state, the
armed forces, and the police of the bourgeois class are
still strong, the proletarian class still has to prepare for
armed struggle.

"While recognizing the possibility of reunifying Viet-Nam
by peaceful means, we should always remember that our
people's principal enemies are the American imperialists and
their agents who still occupy half our country and are

6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
