Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date; 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

aspects of revolutionary development. He sees this primarily
as a coordinating effort and does not intend to get into the
middle of individual agency activities and responsibilities.
As he end his staff perceive areas which require attention and
action by a responsible agency, he will cell this to the
attention of thet agency for the purpose of emphasis; he in-
tends to suggest rather than to criticize...Ambassador Porter
noted that the non-priority areas are still getting the bulk
of the resources, which means that we have not yet really con-
centrated on the priority areas and which also flags the
necessity to bring the priority areas into higher focus. He
will have a great interest in the allocation of resources such
as manpower; yet he recognizes that under wartime conditions
which prevail in Vietnam there will always be some inequity."

It is importent to emphasize that the appointment of Porter to his
new role did indeed improve the organization of the Mission, and that
Porter did sccotplish some of the things that Washington had hoped he
would -- but, under the constraints outlined below, he did not get
enough done fast enough to satisfy the growing impatience in Washington
with the progress of the effort. This impatience was to lead to the
second reorganization and the formation of the Office of Civil Operations
(OcO) after the Manila Conference. Although the impatience of Washington
was justified, the fact is that under the new and limited mandate Porter
had, he did begin the process of pulling together CIA, USAID, and JUSPAO,
and forcing them to work more closely together. He also tried to focus
General Lansdale's liaison efforts with General Thang more closely on
items related to our operational objectives. He presented a new and
vastly improved image of the civilian mission to the press, many of whom
eame to regard him as the most competent high official in the Mission.

To one semi-official observer, Henry Kissinger, who visited Vietnam first
in October of 1965, and then returned in July, 1966, the situation looked
substantially improved:

"Phe organization of the Embassy has been vastly improved

'gince my lest visit. The plethora of competing agencies, each
operating their own program on the basis of partly conflicting
and largely uncoordinated criteria, has been replaced by an
increasingly effective structure under the extremely able
leadership of Bill Porter. Porter is on top of his job. It
would be idle to pretend that the previous emfusion is wholly
overcome. He has replaced competition by coordination; he is
well on his way to imposing effective direction on the basis of
carefully considered criteria. At least the basic structure for
progress exists, Where eight months ago I hardly knew where to
begin, the problem now is how to translate structure into per-
formance -- a difficult but no insuperable task." 6/

Despite Kissinger's hopeful words, there was a growing tendency in
Washington to demand more out of the Mission thet it was then producing.

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
