—

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. Analysis of implications of Westmoreland'’s request for
additional troops.

Series of papers on the following.
Military implications - JCS
Political implications - State

(Political implications in their broadest domestic
and international sense to include internal
Vietnamese problem).

Budgetary results - Defense
Economic implications - Treasury
Congressional implications - Defense

Implications for public opinion - domestic and
- international - State.

h, Negotiation Alternatives
Assignment: State 21/

The papers were to be considered at a meeting to be held at Defense on
Saturday, March 2 at 10:00 A.M. In fact, the meeting was later deferred
until Sunday afternoon and the whole effort of the Task Force shifted to
the drafting of a single Memorandum for the President with a recommended
course of action and supporting papers. The work became so intensive that
it was carried out in teams within ISA, one operating as a drafting com-
mittee and another (Mr. Warnke - ASD/ISA, Dr. Enthoven - ASD/SA, Dr.
Halperin - DASD/ISA/PP, Mr. Steadman - DASD/EA & PR) as a kind of policy
review board. Of the work done outside the Pentagon only the paper on
negotiations prepared by Bundy at State and General Taylor's paper went
to the White House. The other materials contributed by the CIA and State
were fed into the deliberative process going on at -the Pentagon but did not
figure directly in the final memo. It would be misleading, however, not
to note that the drafting group working within ISA included staff members
from both the State Department and the White House, so that the final memo
did represent an interagency effort. Nevertheless, the dominant voice in
the consideration of alternatives as the working group progressed through
three different drafts before the Sunday meeting was that of OSD. To pro-
vide some sense of the ideas being debated with respect to the air war

and negotiations, relevant sections of a number of papers written during

151 TOP: SECRET - Sensitive
