Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

And so on. What lay behind each recommendation was an effort to unify the
various GVN agencies and ministries working on pacification, streamline
their operations, and, at the same time, increase U.S. influence. over those
operations.

While many items the Study Group recommended have still not been carried
out, there has been growing acceptance of the bulk of the recommendations.
In its initial reaction to the paper, MACV'’s Chief of Staff wrote to Ambassa-
dor Lodge "that many actions have been taken or are being considered by
MACV which support and complement the overall objectives envisioned by the
report. There are, however, certain recommendations with which we do not
agree." 30/

The most important reservation that MACV had, concerned the allocation
of resources for the RD effort:

"We are confronted with a determined, well-organized force
operating in regimental and division strength. As long as
this situation exists, it is imperative that the regular
military forces retain first priority for the available man-
power. Once the threat of the enemy's regular forces has
diminished. and the defeat of external aggression is accom-
plished, then other programs should have the first priority
for recruiting...

In addition, MACV opposed the remdval of Division from the RD chain
of command; suggested a further task force to examine the Constabulary
issue in detail; and opposed the suggestion that Special Branch Police --
which meant on the American side the CIA -- take over the anti-infrastructure
effort. (On this latter point, the issue was finally resolved by an in-
genious compromise structure under Westmoreland and Komer called ICEX --
Intelligence Coordination and Exploitation -- in July 1967.) Finally,
Westmoreland rejected any internal changes in the MACV structure, as
suggested by the Study Group. These had included:

" -- the establishment at MACV Division advisory level
of a Deputy Senior Advisor for RD, at Corps 4 Deputy Senior
Advisor for RD, and at COMUSMACV level a Deputy COMUSMACV
for the entire MACV advisory effort and for RD...

" .- changes in the advisory rating system to empha-
size the quality of the advice and the accuracy of reports,
rather than the performance of the organization/Vietnamese
they advise..." 31/

. USAID reacted favorably to the study. In his memo to Lodge, the Acting
USAID Director said that the.report "presents an antidote to our having
been too indulgent with the GVN in the past to our peril and theirs.”

Once again, however, as with MACV, USAID added some- reservations -- and
the reservations all fell in areas in which USAID would have the action
responsibility if something was to be done. USAID feared that the report

86 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
