Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. Themes Germane to the Strategy Debate

Official hopes were high that the Rolling Thunder program begun in
March would rapiily convince Hanoi that it should agree to negotiate a
settlement to the war in the South. After a month of bombing with no
response from the North Vietnamese, optimism began to wane. In the
middle of April it was recognized that in addition to the bombing some
manifestation of the Viet Cong's inability to win in the South was
needed before the Communists would agree to negotiate. By the end of
April, the North Vietnamese showed signs of preparing for a long seige
under the bombing, while they waited for what they saw as the inevitable
victory of the Viet Cong in the South. Indeed, the North Vietnamese
proved their intractability when they failed to respond meaningfully to
overtures made during a week-long pause in the bombing in May. By June,
U.S. officials recognized that something dramatic was going to have to
be added to the bombing program if the Commumists were ever to be per-
suaded to call off their campaign in the South.

All through early 1965, officials in the U.S. Government debated
the level of effort required of the United States in order to achieve
its objectives in South Vietnam. Generally stated, those objectives
were to insure that the Communist insurgents were defeated in their
efforts to take over the government of South Vietnam and that a stable
and friendly government was maintained in their place. The U.S. em-
barked on the Rolling Thunder bombing program in order to convince the
North Vietnamese to cease their direction and support of the insurgency
in the South. When the bombing program, which could have been halted
almost as easily as it was initiated, gave indication that it was not
going to succeed by itself, the U.S. was presented essentially with two
options; (1) to withdraw unilaterally from Vietnam leaving the South
Vietnamese to fend for themselves, or (2) to commit ground forces in
pursuit of its objectives. A third option, that of drastically increas-
ing the scope and scale of the bombing, was rejected because of the
concomitant high risk of inviting Chinese intervention.

This paper deals essentially with the decision by the U.S. Govern-
ment to intervene on the ground in South Vietnam. The debate over
ground strategy was characterized by an almost complete lack of con-
sensus throughout the first half of 1965. Proposals for levels of
commitment ranging from a couple of battalions to several divisions were
under consideration simultaneously. For each identifiable strategy --
and there are three discussed in this paper -- security, enclave, and
search and destroy -- there were many proponents, some of them quite
vociferous. The announcements of decisions regarding the ground build-
up.were invariably couched in terms which gave clear indication to more
aggressive proponents that their turn might yet come.

h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
