Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive 4

TII. Honolulu to Manila
A. Saigon: Porter in Charge

"Question. Mr. President, when you were in Los Angeles reporting
on the Honolulu Conference, you listed eleven items which you

said were discussed, and you said that in all these fields you

set targets, concrete targets. Would it be possible to get a list
of these concrete targets?

"Answer. I don't have any. I think what I had in mind there was
saying that we hoped to make certain progress in certain fields and
we expect to have another conference after a reasonable length of
time, in which we will take the hits, runs, and errors and see what
we have achieved and everybody would be answereble, so to speak, as
to the progress they have made and whether or not they are nearing
their goals...I hope to be in Honolulu in the next few months,
maybe in the middle of the year, and see what has been done. I
thought it was good that we could go there and have the Government
and the military leader, General Westmoreland, and the Ambassador
and the Deputy Ambassador, meet with the Vice President, the
Secretary of Agriculture and technicians, and try to expose to the
world for three days what this country is trying to do to feed the
hungry, and educate the people, and to improve the life span for
people who just live to be 35 now...eA lot of our folks think it is
just a military effort. We don't think it should be that, and we
don't want it to be that..." 1/

As the President returned to Washington from Honolulu, the Vice
President, Secretary Freeman, and McGeorge Bundy headed up a large list
of high-ranking officials that went on to Saigon. Bundy, about to leave
the government, carried with him authority from the President to give
the Deputy Ambassador wide authority over all aspects of the rural con-
struction program. On February 12, 1966, the President sent Ambassador
Lodge a NODIS telegram, which was designed to pave the way for Bundy's
reorgenization effort:

"QUOTE. I hope that you share my own satisfaction with the
Honolulu Conference. The opportunity to talk face to face with
you, General Westmoreland end the Vietnamese leaders has given
me a much better appreciation of the problems each of you face,
put perhaps even more importantly the opportunities open to us.
I was particularly impressed with the apparent determination of
Thieu, Ky and the other Vietnamese Ministers to carry forwerd a
social policy of radical and constructive change. However, I
full weli realize the tremendous job thet they and we have in
putting this into practice. I intend to see that our organiza-
tion back here for supportins this is promptly tightened and

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
