Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

situation in South Vietnam, particularly if there were to be clear evi-
dence of greatly increased infiltration from the north.") Should
specific provocations not occur, a contingency target date of 1 January
1965 was indicated: 12h/

1 oe aital [the/ absence of such major new developments
[incidents or increased infiltration/, we should probably
be thinking of a contingency date for planning purposes, as
suggested by Ambassador Taylor, of 1 January 1965." 125/

The working paper elaborated more fully than the cable the kind

' of preliminary actions considered necessary to set the stage. Some of
this elaboration was provided in suggested language changes penciled-in by
OSD prior to an inter-agency meeting called to discuss its contents. Refer-
ring to air strikes in the Panhandle (proposed to begin in September), a
Suggested OSD addition stated: "The strikes should probably be timed and
plotted on the map to bring them to the borders of North Vietnam at the
end of December." The main body of the text suggested that the January
Operations include "action against infiltration routes and facilities" as
"probably the best opening gambit." It explained that-"the family of
infiltration-related targets starts with clear military installations
near the borders /and/ can be extended almost at will northward." The
"next upward move" was suggested to include action against "military-related
targets," such as "POL installations and the mining of Haiphong Harbor" and
"key bridges and railroads." The purpose perceived for these operations
was "to inflict progressive damage that would have a meaningful cumulative
effect." 126/

Ambassador Taylor viewed 1 January 1965 as a "target D-Day" before
which the U.S. Mission and the GVN should develop "a posture of maximum
readiness for a deliberate escalation of pressure against North Viet Nem."
The nature of this escalation was perceived as “a carefully orchestrated
bombing attack on NVN, directed primarily at infiltration and other mili-
tary targets." It would consist of

"U.S. reconnaissance planes, VINAF/FARMGATE air-
craft against those targets which could be attacked
safely in spite of the presence of the MIGs, and addi-
tional U.S. combat aircraft if necessary for the effective
execution of the bombing programs."

He qualified this assessment with the observation, "We must always recog-
nize, however, that events may force [the] U.S. to advance D-Day to a
considerably earlier date." The reason for this qualification was Taylor's
concern that the GVN might not be able to sustain its authority until
‘January. Thus, in order to "avoid the possible consequences of a collapse
of national morale" it would be necessary, he felt, "to open the campaign
against the DRV without delay." The nature of the air campaign "would be
essentially the same" as under the January scheme, except that it would
rely “almost exclusively on U.S. military means." 127/

aes TOP SECREE - Sensitive
