Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

problem in Southeast Asia and different assumptions as to how the United
States Government should proceed to achieve its policy goals. During
the early months of 1964, these are well illustrated in the different
approaches taken to the problem of determining the extent and implica-
tions of the movement of men and supplies through Laos.

At the end of 1963 and early in 1964, there was general agreement
among all Washington agencies that we lacked adequate information con-
cerning the nature and magnitude of whatever movement of men and materiel
was occurring along the Laotian infiltration routes. For example, citing
the "lack of clarity" on the "role of external intrusion" in South Vietnam,
Walt Rostow urged William Sullivan on the eve of his March visit to attempt
+o "come back from Saigon with as lucid and agreed a picture” as possible
on the extent of the infiltration and its influence on the Viet Cong. 4a/
A few days later, the Defense Intelligency Agency informed Secretary
McNamara that "certain intelligence gaps" were "related primarily to the

es and amounts of weapons and materiel coming into South Vietnam,
ag the number of Viet Cong personnel infiltrating into South Vietnam
... he/ To alleviate this situation, the JCS favored such measures as
ground probes into Laos by GVN reconnaissance teams and low-level recon-
naissance flights over the trail areas by GVN and U.S. aircraft. The
State Department, supported by OSD/ISA, opposed such operations as
potentially damaging to our relations with the Laotian government.

In supporting its recommendations and in its comments on State-ISA
proposals, the JCS argued that an integrated approach should be taken to
the security of Southeast Asia, with our actions in Laos closely related
to those taken on behalf of South Vietnam. They saw the key problem for
all of Southeast Asia as the DRV's aggressive intent. As they stated,
"the root of the problem is in North Vietnam and must be dealt with
there." 43/ Moreover, they felt that reconnaissance operations into
and over Laos were justified because they saw Laotian security as dependent
on thet of South Vietnam. "Laos," they argued, "would not be able to
endure the establishment of a communist -- or pseudo neutralist -- state
on its eastern flank." They criticized our “self-imposed restrictions"
as tending to make the task in Vietnam "more complex, time-consuming, and
in the end, more costly" and for possibly signalling "irresolution +o our
enemies." 4k/ Accordingly, they implied thet the United States should
convince the Laotian Premier of the need to take direct action against the
Viet Minh infiltration through low-level reconnaissance and other cross-
border operations -- but above all, to carry out these actions in order to
impress the DRV with our resolve to deny its insurgents a sanctuary. In
the specific context of recommending these kind of actions, they stated
"that the time has come to lift the restrictions which limit the effective-
ness of our milivary operations." 45/

The State-ISA policy view also regarded Laos and Vietnam as parts of
the overall Southeast Asian problem, but in early 1964 their conception
of how U.S. objectives might be achieved extended beyond the need to thwart
the communist guerrilla threat. In this view, policy success meant

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
12
