Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

@. Continue actions contained within present policies, includ-
ing reprisals for VC provocations. The JCS identified this as the
group's Option A but stated that the added demands it placed on the DRV
- were "not commensurate with those imposed by DRV or RVN." In essence,
they agreed with the Working Group's evaluation that this alternative
would neither accomplish our objectives nor alleviate the critical
situation in South Vietnam.

3. Undertake graduated military and political initiatives to
apply additional pressures against the DRV,

without necessarily determining in advance to what
degree we will commit ourselves to achieve our ob-
jectives, or at whet point we might stop to nego-

tiate, or what our negotiating objectives might be.

The JCS stated thet this alternative corresponded to the NSC Working
Group's Option C, which they criticized for its “uncertain pace” and
because it did not include “a clear determination to see things through
in full.” They argued that such an "inconclusive" option "could permit
and encourage enemy build-ups to counter ow: own," and thus “raise the
risks and costs to us of each separate military undertaking.”

4. Undertake a "controlled program" of graduated military and
political pressures, based on an “advanced decision to continue military
pressures, if necessary, to the full limits of what military actions can
contribute toward U.S. national Objectives." The JCS called this "a
varient and logical extension" of Option C and cited their proposal of
18 November as a detailed description of it.

9+ Undertake a “controlled program of intense military pres-
sures...designed to have major militery and psychological impact from
the outset, and accompanied by appropriate political pressures." The
JCS offered this alternative in-lieu of the Working Group's Option B
which they stated "is not a valid formulation of any authoritative
views known to the J¢s." In particular, they specified that their in-
tensive program would

be undertaken on the basis that it woulé be carried
through, if necessary, to the full limit of what
military actions can contribute toward national ob-
Jectives; it would be designed, however, for sus-
pension short of those limits if objectives were
earlier achieved.

For a full description of this alternative, they referred to their pro=
posal of 1) November. 105/

Of the five alternatives, the JCS stated their belief that only
the last two offered "a probability of achieving [evrrent U.S./ objectives."

> 3h TOP SECRET - Sensitive
