Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
Security Information

been pushed so that French troops can be reduced but
also to get the states themselves to develop a national
sentiment that will allow them to face local difficulties
as soon as possible. Complete withdrawal of the French -
is not involved. General Clark, when he came to Korea,
was very proud of his Korean army but said that if the
U.S. left Korea it would all disappear. Therefore, he
wished to maintain the U.S. effort in Korea just like
the French in Indochina. [It is true that the Laotian
affair involves a singular aggravation. An operational
plan had been given to the Pentagon, including certain
inevitable risks. Within 2-1/2 years, as President
Eisenhower has said, it would allow us to arrive at

a situation where the picture would be reversed al-
though it would not mean complete victory. That plan is
essentially based on the development of national armies.
It requires for its solution finances, cadres and rapid
training of units.

The French missions which have been received in Korea
were very useful. Marshal Juin himself has brought back
information that the French propose to use in the formation
of the Vietnam army. But the problem is not the same
in Indochina as in Korea. The problems facing the two
armies are not comparable, but some lessons can be
applied.

M. LETOURNEAU did not believe that Saigon head-
quarters can be fairly accused of not entirely applying
the political policies of Paris. The French have no
reason ‘to fear that the Vietnam government would be more
demanding when they have an army. Their exigencies are
not worrisome since the Vietnam government cannot pursue
any other policy. He said he had not many ways of
showing good faith and the good faith of his subordinates
except perhaps to submit to a lie detector, which? would
not be customary. As to racial discrimination, the
question of clubs, the problem has never arisen in Indo-
china as in other colonies because there has always
been close touch between local and French families. The
problem arises even less now that there is a Vietnamese

SECRET
Security Information

Was:
