Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -- Sensitive

fail to produce desired results. In the case of the covert operations
program, these tendencies were reinforced through the evocation of a
GVN policy commitment and the involvement of GVN officials in its
implementation. :

B. Origins and Development: Presidential Support and Approval

The covert program was spawned in May of 1963, when the JCS
directed CINCPAC to prepare a plan for GVN "hit end run” operations
against NVN. These operations were to be "non-attributable” and carried
out "with U.S. military materiel, training and advisory assistance." u/
Approved by the JCS on 9 September as CINCPAC OPLAN 34-63, the plan was
discussed during the Vietnam policy conference at Honolulu, 20 November
1963. Here a decision was made to develop a combined COMUSMACV-CAS, Saigon
plan for a lé-month program of covert operations. Instructions forwarded.
by the JCS on 26 November specifically requested provision for: ie)
harassment; (2) diversion; (3) political pressure; (4) capture of prisoners;
(5) physical destruction; (6) acquisition of intelligence; (7) generation
of intelligence; and (8) diversion of DRV resources." Further, that the
plan provide for "selected actions of graduated scope and intensity to
include commando type coastal raids." 5/ To this guidance was added that
given by President Johnson to the effect that "planning should include...
estimates of such factors as: (1) resulting damage to NVN; (2) the
plausibility of denial; (3) possible NVN retaliation; and (4) other inter-
national reaction.” 6/ The MACV-CAS plan, designated OPLAN 34A, and
providing for "a spectrum of capabilities for RVNAF to execute against
NVN,” was forwarded by CINCPAC on 19 December 1963. 7/

; The idea of putting direct pressure on North Vietnam met prompt
receptivity on the part of President Johnson. According to then Assistant
‘Secretary of State, Roger Hilsman, it was just a few days before the
military-CIA submission that State Department Counselor, Walt Rostow
passed to the President "a well-reasoned case for a gradual escalation.” 8/
Rostow was well-known as an advocate of taking direct measures against

the external sources of guerrilla support, having hammered away at this
theme since he first presented it at Fort Bragg in April 1961. In any
event, on 21 December, President Johnson directed that an interdepartmental
committee study the MACV-CAS plan to select from it those least risk."

This committee, under the chairmanship of Major General Krulak, USMC,
completed its study on 2 January 1964 and submitted its report for review
by the principal officials of its various member agencies. The report
recommended the 3-phase approach and the variety of Fhase I operations
described earlier. 9/ President Jonnson approved the committee's recom-
mendations on 16 January and directed that the initial 4-month phase of

the program be implemented beginning 1 February. 10/

= st

C. Concept and Rationale: Convince DRV to Desist bv Raising the Cost

In view of program performance and later decisions, the conceptua-
lization underlying the program of covert operations against North Vietnam
is particularly significant. JCS objectives for the initial CINCPAC formu-
lation were to increase the cost to the DRV of its role in the South

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
