Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In trying to respond to the question McNamara discovered a great deal
of fluidity in the number of targets on JCS lists over time, and in
the priority or status assigned to them. He therefore set out to
reconcile the discrepancies. The effort unearthed a highly complex
system of classification that began with the military commands in the
Pacific and extended through the Joint Staff to his own office. Part
of the problem lay with the changing damage assessments and another
part with differing categories at different echelons. To untangle

the process, reconcile past discrepancies and establish a common basis
for classification and recommendation, McNamara, Warnke, the ISA staff
and the Joint Staff spent long hours in September and October in highly
detailed target by target analysis and evaluation. After much wrangling
they did achieve agreement on a procedure and set of rules that made it
possible for everyone to work with the same data and understanding of
the target system. The procedure they set up and the one that operated
through the fall and winter until the March 31 partial suspension was
described in a memo from Warnke to incoming Secretary Clark Clifford on
March 5, 1968:

Twice a month the Joint Staff has been revising the
Rolling Thunder Target List for the bombing of North Vietnam.
The revisions are forwarded to my office and reconciled
with the prior list. This reconciliation summary is then
forwarded to your office...

Every Tuesday and Friday the Joint Staff has been
sending me a current list of the authorized targets on the
target list which have not been struck or restruck since
returning to a recommended status. After our review, this
list also is sent to your office....

In the normal course of events, new recommendations by
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for targets lying
within the 10 and 4 mile prohibited circles around Hanoi and
Haiphong, respectively, or in the Chinese Buffer Zone have
been submitted both to the Secretary of Defense's office
and to my office in ISA. ISA would then ensure that the
State Department had sufficient information to make its
recommendation on the new proposal. ISA also submitted
its evaluation of the proposal to your office. On occasions
the Chairman would hand-carry the new bombing proposals
directly to the Secretary of Defense for his approval.

Under those circumstances, the Secretary, if he were not
thoroughly familiar with the substance of the proposal,
would call ISA for an evaluation. State Department and
White House approval also were required before the Chairman's
office could authorize the new strikes. 17/ °

100 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
