Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Young Turk leaders, Ky, Thieu, Thi, and Cang, and gave them a stern lecture,
speaking, as he later put it, "as one soldier to another." As recorded
just afterward by the U.S, participants, the meeting went as follows:

".-AMBASSADOR TAYLOR: Do all of you understand English?
(Vietnamese officers indicated they did, although the under-
standing of General Thi was known to be weak.) I told you
all clearly at General Westmoreland's dinner we Americans
were tired of coups. Apparently I wasted my words. Maybe
this is because something is wrong with my French because
you evidently didn't understand. I made it clear that all
the military plans which I know you would like to carry out
are dependent on governmental stability. Now you have made
® real mess. We cannot carry you forever if you do things
like this. Who speaks for this group? Do you have a spokes-
man?

"GENERAL KY: I am not the spokesman for the group but
I do speak English. JI will explain why the Armed Forces
took this action last night.

"We understand English very well. We are aware of our
responsibilities, we are aware of the sacrifices of our people
over twenty years. We know you want stability, but you can-
not have stability until you have unity...But still there
are rumors of coups and doubts among groups. We think these
rumors come from the HNC, not as an organization but from
some of its members. Both military and civilian leaders
regard the presence of these people in the HNC as divisive ~
of the Amred Forces due to their influence.

"Recently the Prime Minister showed us a letter he
had received from the Chaixman of the HNC. This letter
told the Prime Minister to beware of the military, and said
that maybe the military would want to come back to power.
Also the HNC illegally sought to block the retirement of
the generals that, the Armed Forces Council unanimously
recommended be retired in order to improve unity in the
Armed Forces.

"GENERAL THIEU: The HNC cannot be bosses because of the
Constitution. Its members must prove that they want to fight.

"GENERAL KY: It looks as though the HNC does not want
unity. ‘It does not want to fight the Communists.

"Tt has been rumored that our action of last night
was an intrigue of Khanh against Minh, who must be retired.
Why do we seek to retire these generals? Because they had
their chance and did badly...

’ 55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
