Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

the Buddhists but not under threats, and that it would not permit dis-
orders. Second, GV) might steal the initiative from the Buddhists by
making a generous public offer of elections. Whichever course they
followed, State wanted them to be sure it would work and would avoid a
head-on collisicn with the Buddhists. In reply, Lodge agreed on the
need to avoid a head-on collision; as for the means, he, like State,
simply hoped for the best:

We should not settle on one solution or another. Rather it
is possible, if not probable, that, unless uncontrollable mass
reaction is brought about, each side will seek to errange what
can be looked upon as widely acceptable. Sy

On March 22, Lodge and Ky had a long discussion of tactics relating
to elections and constitution-writing. Elections were scheduled to come
up for the largely powerless but symbolic provincial councils (which
advised the Province Chiefs on policy matters), and Ky had reportedly
toyed with calling off these elections. He was also far behind schedule
on the constituent assembly he had publicly promised on January 19 for
just after Tet, and as noted had privately promised the U.S. Government
at Honolulu. 6/ lodge reported:

2. .+-He is eager for advice and when he received it,
he said he agreed with it. Now it remains to be seen whether
it will be carried out.

3. My advice was based on careful reflection and consul-
tation with my associates and was to this effect;

4, The GVN should not cancel provincial elections as I
had heard reported. He said that this was not exactly the
case; that there were two provincial councils, which didn't
went elections. I said in that event these councils should
be made to say publicly that they didn't want elections so
that the onus of not holding these elections would not fall
on the Government. A public announcement had been made that
the Government was in favor of holding these provincial
elections; the offices involved have little actual consequence
but are of symbolic significance; Washington had been informed
of this fact; and if there was some reason why in one or two
provinces they should not be held, then the provinces should
make the reason plain.

5. I then advised that he should take the lead and influ-
ence opinion, and not be at the mercy of events. I suggested
that a list of names for so-called consultative assembly (which
I suggested would be better named "preparatory commission")
which aims to draft a constitution, should be confirmed by the
Generals. ‘When this had been done, I suggested that then Ky

12 TOP SeCRET - Sensitive
