Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"If, however, the picture is sombre, it is not wnrelieved.
The 1967 program may look at this point unencouraging statisti-
cally, but its progress is of a different and more important
sort. In critical areas, progress has been registered. There
has evolved an implicit understanding by many in the GVN that
RD is a longer-term progress than hitherto believed, requiring
a greater concentration of resources. In fact, there is in-
creasing evidence that programming for 1967 has so concentrated
scarce resources in the 11-point Ap Doi Moi that the GYN
presence and services are spread very thin indeed in areas of
lower priority. The fact that in general each RD team will
remain in each hamlet for six months throughout the year, is
a fundamental improvement in the progran.

"As a result of the finer definition of the intent of RD
and more interest in its possibilities, the 1967 program has
become more vital than its predecessors. This vitality has
produced new ideas, an increasing flexibility, which marks im-
portant progress in the program. Moreover, what the country
has been engaged in is the process of laying a base for develop-
ment; a long drawn out process which sees little initial reward,
but without which nothing of permanence will be achieved. In
other words, the first quarter of the year has not been witness
to a vital social revolution, but has instead found evidence of
a growing understanding of the nature of the revolution to come,
and in so doing has taken a further step in the painful process
of building a nation." 10/

With the formation of CORDS, this history becomes current events.
CORDS is charged now with solving what have previously been unsolvable
problems -- energizing the GVN to do things which it is not as interested
in as we are; winning the hearts and minds of people who do not under-
stand us or speak our language; working under intense pressure for im-
mediate results in a field in which success -- if possible at all -- may
require years. We have concentrated on the history of the United States
bureaucracy in this study because that, in retrospect, seems to have been
where the push for pacification came from -- not the Vietnamese. We have
not been able to analyze properly the actual course of the effort in the
field, where contradictory assessments of progress have plagued the U.S.
In the final section which follows, we try to draw a few lessons from
the course of events described in this study.

When completed, CORDS had produced a structure in which, regardless
of civil-military tensions that cannot be wished away, all hands were
working together under a single chain of command. The structure was
massive, so massive that the Vietnamese were in danger of being almost

136 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
