Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

with the weak and unwilling being weeded out. After graduation,

each team was assigned to a district of a province, with responsi-
bility for a number or villages. When the team finished its work

in the first village, it would move to a second village, revisiting
the first village periodically to check on local progress. This
would continue until all villages in a district were covered, at
which time the civic action team directly under the government in the
provincial capital would take over district work, now organized and
ready for administration.

"When a team entered a village, they would call a village meeting,
explain their presence and plans. The following morning, they would
set to work to build three community buildings with local materials;
if they had been successful in winning over the population, the
villagers pitched in and helped. One building was a village hall,
for meetings of village officials. Another was a primary school.

The third was a combination information hall (news, information about
the government, etc.) and dispensary (using the village medical kits
developed by ICA). Following up was the building of roads or paths
to link the village with provincial roads, if in a remote area, build
pit latrines, undertake malaria control, put in drainage, and under-
take similar community projects. Villagers were trained to take over
these tasks, including primary education and first aid. ;

"The work of Civic Action teams, at the same grass-roots level
as that of Communist workers, proved effective. They became the
targets of Communist agents, with political attacks (such as stirring
up local Cochin-Chinese against Tonkinese Civic Action personnel)
and then murders. Even while the field work was in its early develop-
ment stage, President Diem ordered the teams to start working directly
with Army commands in pacification campaigns, as the civil government
"troops" in what were essentially combat zones. As Civic Action proved
itself, it was extended to all provinces south of the 17th Parallel."

Had the cadres been able to confine themselves to these
missions, and had the several Saigon ministries, whose field responsibil-
ities they had assumed, been content to have them continue to represent
them, matters might have developed differently. As it happened, the
cadres became preoccupied with Diem's Anti-Communist campaign, and their
operations came under bureaucratic attack from Saigon agencies unwilling
to allow the Civic Action teams to carry their programs to the people.
Both influences converted the cadre into exclusively propagandistic and
political instruments, and drew them away from economic or social activi-
ties; in late 1956, Civic Action was cut back severely. In 1957, Kieu
Cong Cung died, and Nhu absorbed the remnants into his organization.

4. and Reform

But the salesmen were less at fault than the product. Diem
had to promise much and deliver well to best the Viet Minh in rural reform,

eh, TOP SECRET - Sensitive

