Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

Genial of Southeast Asia to communism. The United States should
continue its present support programs to strengthen the will and
ability to resist the Chinese Communists, to render Communist mili-
tary operations as costly as possible, and to gain time for the
United States and its allies to build up the defenses of the Gere
shore chain and weaken communist power at its source,

h5. The United States should develop its support programs in
such form and in such manner in each country as will effectively
stimulate the use of its resources to the advantage of the free
world, contribute to the development of sound economies and adequate
military estatlishments, and take into account the ability of each
country to absorb and its willingness to put to effective use Amer-
ican aid. In any instance where a government friendly to the United
‘States is conducting actual resistance to internal subversive forces
or overt aggression, the United States should favorably consider
contributions to the ability of such a BONS PME to continue resis-
tance.

46, The general security problems of Southeast Asia are the
subject of military staff conversations among the United States,
the United Kingdom and France.

h7, Programs of information and educational exchange should
be continued in the countries of Southeast Asia and should be
designed to develop on the part of the governments and peoples of
the area, realization, and action in accordance therewith, of the
vital objectives which they share with the United States and of
the ways in which the achievement of these objectives are threatened
by the aggressive purposes of Soviet Communism,

48. At the present time, the United States faces the following
major problems in Southeast Asia:

a. Defense of Indochina. The loss of Indochina to
communist control would greatly increase the threat to the
other mainland states of Southeast Asia and to Indonesia,

The Viet Minh with the aid of strong Chinese Communist mili-
tary intervention can conquer Indochina. Therefore, the

forces opposing the Viet Minh must repidly increase their
BEDAERY ASEGUE2sa GESTSES*G REL POTTY VES EnmamPone? MSE come

b. Chinese Imperialism. The United ee should ex-
pand and intensify the psychological warfare effort to increase
an awareness in the area of the threat which Soviet and Chin-
ese imperialism poses to the national independence, economic
betterment and traditional ideals of each country in the re-
gion. The United States should seek to reduce.-the ties be-

Nsc 48/5 sn , ; TOP SECRET

hl3
