Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

126.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

be helped if it were shown clearly to world that this is inter-
national problem. Diem gave no direct comment on this suggestion.
He indicated two main aspects of this problem: (1) Vietnamese
people are worried about absence formal commitment by US to Viet-
Nam. They fear that if situation deteriorates Viet-Nam might be
abandoned by US. If troops are introduced without a formal com-
mitment they can be withdrawn at any time and thus formal commit-
ment is even more important in psychological sense. (2) Contin-
gency plan should be prepared re use American forces in Viet-Nam
at any time this may become necessary. In this connection Diem
seemed to be talking about combat forces. While it was not com-
pletely clear what Diem has in mind at present time he seemed to be
saying that he wants bilateral defense treaty and preparation of
plans for use American forces (whatever is appropriate) but under
questioning he did not repeat his earlier idea relayed to me by
Thuan that he wanted combat forces. 16/

Here, as earlier, we get no explicit statement on Washington's attitude
toward a treaty. Further, no strong conclusion can be drawn from the fact
that Taylor took the initiative in raising the issue of troops, since it
might have been awkward not to mention the issue at all after Thuan's pre-
sentation to Nolting a few days previous.

But on the 23rd, we find this in a cable from MAAG Chief McGarr;

Serious flood in Mekong delta area...(worst since 1937)
raises possibility that flood relie? could be justification
for moving in US military personnel for humanitarian purposes
with subsequent retention if desirable. Gen. Taylor and
Ambassador evaluating feasibility and desirability. 16a/

Taylor met with Diem and Thuan again the following day, the 24th.
Taylor provided the Vietnamese a written summary of items he described as
"personal ideas to which I was seeking their reaction." Item E was headed
"Introduction of U.S. Combat troops." It proposed "a flood relief task force,
largely military in composition, to work with GVN over an extended period of
rehabilitation of areas. Such a force might contain engineer, medical,
signal, and transportation elements as well as combat troops for the protec-
tion of relief operations.” Diem now seems to have changed his mind again
on combat troops. Here is the cable:

1. # The essential conclusions which we have reached at the end of a
week of briefings, consultations, and field trips follow:

Ae There is a critical political-military situation in SVN

brought on by western policy in Laos and by the continued build-up of
the VC and their recent successful attacks. These circumstances coupled

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
