Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Haiphong, the only port capable of conveniently receiving and handling
bulk POL brought in by large tankers. From large tank farms at Haiphong
with a capacity of about one-fourth of the annual imports, the POL was
transported by road, rail, and water to other large storage sites at
Hanoi and elsewhere in the country. Ninety-seven percent of the NVN POL
storage capacity was concentrated in 13 sites, 4 of which had already
been hit. The other 9 were still off limits. They were, of course,
highly vulnerable to air attack. 8/

In making the recommendation, the JCS emphasized the
interdiction effects. They pointed out that the strikes would not hurt
the industrial base or the civilian economy very much. They would directly
affect the military establishment, which consumed some 60 percent of all
POL, and the "government transportation system," which consumed nearly
all the rest. Supplying the armed forces in NVN as well as in Laos and
SVN depended heavily on POL-powered vehicles, and this dependence had if
anything increased as a result of air attacks on the railroads:

The flow of supplies to all communist military forces,
both in and through the country to SVN and Laos, would be
greatly impeded since POL-fueled carriers are the principal
vehicles for this transport. Further, the interdiction of
rail lines and destruction of railroad rolling stock has
resulted in the need to move increased tonnages by alternate
means, primarily trucks and motor driven water craft. Thus,
the most effective way to compound the current interdiction

_ of DRV LOCs; and to offset the introduction and use of sub-
stitute modes and routes, is to reduce drastically the
available supply of POL. 9/

The JCS also suggested that POL in NVN was becoming increas-
ingly important to the effort in the South. There were now 5 confirmed
and 2 suspected NVA regiments in SVN, increasing the load on the supply
lines through Laos, and the roads there were being improved, indicating
that NVN planned to rely more heavily on trucks to handle the load.
Significantly, the importation of trucks was increasing, and despite
losses inflicted by ROLLING THUNDER strikes, the size of the truck fleet
. was growing.

The JCS recommended hitting the most important target,
Haiphong POL storage, first, followed closely by attack on the remaining
8 targets. The weight of effort required was 336 strike and 80 flak
suppression aircraft, with not more than 10 losses predicted. All POL
targets could be destroyed with only light damage to surrounding areas
and few civilian casualties (less than 50).

66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
