Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

by states responsible for their administration has been re-affirmed
during the current discussions at San Francisco. It is abundantly
‘clear that there is no possibility at the present time or in the
foreseeable future that France will volunteer to place Indochina
under trusteeship, or consent to any program of international accoun-
tability which is not applied to the colonial possessions of other

powers.
|

6. French policies in Indochina before the war were unsatis-
factory both as regards the Indochinese and as regards economic and
commercial relations with other countries. There is increasing
independence sentiment among the Indochinese and this movement appears
to have at least the tacit support of China. There are indications,
however, that the present French Government is embarking upon a new
policy which is taking these factors into account. On several
occasions in recent years, French authorities have issued policy
statements on the future of Indochina. These follow a peneral trend
toward greater autonomy for the French administration of Indochina
but the most recent statement, that of March 24, 1945, is still vague
and indicates little progress toward the establishment of genuine self
yule for the Indochinese or of an open door economic policy in Indo-
chine. ;

7. The economic policies pursued before the war by the French
administration in respect to foreign trade with China through Haiphong
and over the Yunaan railway affected adversely the economic develop-
ments of southwest Chine and foreign commerce with that region. Unless
the situation is changed, this will be an increasingly importent source
of postwar friction.

8. The frontier between Indochina and Thailand is also a potential
source of future trouble in southeastern Asia because it does not con-
form to etImic and cultural groupings and involves conflicting historic
claims. ;

Recommendations

Tn the light of the above considerations, the following recommen-
dations are submitted for your approval.

1. The Government of the United States shovld make known to the
French Provisional Government its concern for the future peace and
stability of the Far East and its views as to how French action with
respect to Indochina can contribute toward the maintenance of peace
and stability. To that end the draft of a proposed telegraphic instruc-
tion to the American Ambassador at Paris is enclosed herewith. In this
instruction the Ambassedor is directed to seek the views of the French

portance for the future peace and stability of this ares.

SH oe Fai | pi Tee iy oes
