Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

6. Washington Acts: U.S.Will (Again) Support Diem

Washington responded with alacrity to Diem's success, superficial
though it was. Saigon was told to forget Dulles' earlier message about US
willingness to see a change in government. Policy had not changed after all:
the US supported Diem. The Saigon Embassy burned the first message. 127/

7- Diem and Others Defy Bao Dai

Buoyed by his showing against Bay Vien, Diem ignored the summons
from Bao Dai which appeared on April 28. The Emperor ordered Diem and
General Ty to Cannes, placed Binh Xuyen sympathizer General Vy in charge of
the army and dispatched General Hinh to Saigon with personal instructions
from Bao Dai. 128/ Diem refused to leave Saigon, refused to allow General Vy
to assume command, refused to allow General Hinh into the country. 129/

On April 30 a new development surfaced. The National Revolu-
tiohary Congress of the Vietnamese people was announced. Backed by Cao Dai
Generals Phuong and The , Hoa Hao General Ngo, other attentiste politicians,
it claimed to represnt almost all political parties in South Vietnam. The
Congress declaration repudiated Bao Dai, dissolved the present government
and called on Diem to form a new government and elect a national assembly to
draft a constitution. 130/

Diem was receptive to the program of the Revolutionary Congress,
particularly since his brother Nhu had a hand in drafting it. He was prob-
ably not as receptive to some of the activist members of the Congress, how-
ever, most of whom joined in a Revolutionary Committee. Generals Trinh Minh
The and Phuong confided to Lansdale:

The Revolutionary Committee had grown out of the Revolutionary
Congress Front organization which Diem's brother Nhu had tried
to organize some days earlier; they had followed (SMM's) advice
and had joined with Nhu in the Front but were dissatisfied with
some of the weak organizations they felt Nhu was depending on,
so had organized something more dynamic to meet the threat of Vy
and Bao Dai and called themselves the Revolutionary Committee.
They wanted Bao Dai dethroned and wanted the French to stop
interfering in Vietnamese affairs. 131/

Support, backhanded though it may have been, helped Diem politic-
ally in Vietnam and with the United States, Militarily he was never really
threatened by Bao Dai or Generals Vy or Hinh (who was never able to deliver
Bao Dai's special orders). The National Army was stronger than French and
Americans thought and it refused to obey General Vy. The following episode,
related to Lansdale by General Ty and Colonel Tran Van Don after their tem-
porary arrest by Vy, illustrates this. General Vy bragged about being able
to get anything he wanted from the French. Ty and Don asked him to prove

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

32
