Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

"Pe, Communist control of this area would alleviate
considerably the food problem of China and would make
available to the USSR important strategic materials, In
this connection, Soviet control of all the major compo-
nents. of Asiata war potential might become a decisive fac-
‘tor affecting the balance of power between the United
States and the USSR. A Soviet position of dominance over
Asia, Western Europe, or both, would constitute a major
threat to United States security; and

"oe. A Soviet position of dominance over the Far
East would also threaten the United States position in
Japan since that country could thereby be denied its
Asian markets, sources of food and other raw materials.
The feasibility of retention by the United States of its
Asian offshore island bases could thus be jeopardized,"

2. The series of defeats suffered recently by the French in
northern Tonkin serves to focus attention upon the urgency of the
current military situation in Indochina and points up the fact
that the Viet Minhs now constitute a direct threat to the French
military position in Indochina, . The current military situation
is serious since the effect produced by the impact of French de-
feats can gain momentum which may have dire repercussions upon an
already deteriorating political situation in Southeast Asia. By
taking over border posts, the Viet Minhs now can maintain unin-
“errupted liaison with Communist China. At this time when a major-
ity of the Indochinese are favorably disposed toward the Viet Minhs,
as opposed to the French. and Bao Dai, any increases in popular
support of the Viet Minhs could have alarming consequences, -The
deteriorating military and political situation in French Indochina
demands that the United States policy toward Indochina be recast
in order to assist in restoring the balance in favor of the French
and Vietnamese,

3. There is an important difference between the strategic
imoortance of Indochina to the United States in a major war and
its strategic imoortance in a cold war. Current war plans do not
contemplate the deployment of United States military forces for
the retention of Indochina in the event of global war, However,
if the communists gained control of Indochina at any time other than
in the course of a global war, this would bring about almost im-
mediately a dangerous condition with respect to the internal secu-
-ity of all of the other countries of Southeast Asia, as well as the
Philippines and Indonesia, and would contribute to thelr probable
eventual fall to communism, Even India and Pakistan would be threat-
ened, Thus the loss of Indochina to communism would have direct
implications on United States security, In addition, this loss wovld
have widespread political end psychological repercussions upon other
hon-communist states throuvugnout the world. In view of United States
Security interests in the country, and the critical situation now

y % Fe = , aS on
4SC 64/2 TOP SECRET

412
