Nee EEE

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Aezileat,
: AAPL LED Ce a, CF
TOP SECRET - Sensitive rset lgatl”

and inasmuch eas Minh was still a popular figure, Khanh was bound to regard
Minh as a threat to his personal prospects. 19/

For several days following the amouncement of the new constitution,
a head of steam built up among students and Buddhists. There is no sign
that the Eubassy did anything to anticipate or head off the coming trouble,
other than the previously mentioned words of caution that Khanh disregarded.
On August 21, student demonstrations broke out. Violence built up in the
streets, organized and orchestrated by the Buddhists and the VC. 20/

Taylor called on Khanh on August 24 in his Dalat retreat to tell him

how seriously the Embassy viewed the demonstrations. The discussion revolved

around "public information" and completion of arrangements for the new
govermment. Khanh agreed to announce the members of the new government
by Thursday, the 27th, and to meet the Buddhist leadership to hear their
complaints and to try to enlist their help. He also promised to meet some
student demands, to crack down on the demonstrations, and to enforce the
old mobilization decrees plus new ones.

State responded to these events with a public announcement of support
for Khanh in more direct language than any previously used:

"The United States government fully recognizes the need
for national unity in South Vietnam and is, therefore, support-
ing the Khanh government as the best means of building such
unity at the same time that the war effort is being prosecuted ;
Obviously anything of a divisive nature is neither in the
interest of the Vietnamese goverment nor its people." 21/

That evening Khanh met three top Buddhists leaders in Saigon, after
they refused to go to Dalat. Their principal demands, among eight, were
the immediate abrogation of the August 16 charter and the holding of free
elections by November 1, 1965. Khanh made the mistake of telling them
he would have to consult the Americans.

Taylor and others met Khanh at 1:00 a.m. August 25. Observing diplo-
matic propriety, Taylor said his tentetive personal views as an interested
third party were thet Khanh should not knuckle under to a minority group
on such en important issue as the August 16 charter, especially under -
an ultimatum. Khanh agreed and proposed to issue @ more limited procla-
mation immediately (which he did at 5:00 a.m.) that would meet certain
concerns of the Buddhists and students. 22/ ;

Khanh's proclamation promised to revise the constitution, diminish
censorship, rectify local abuses of government, and permit orderly demon-
strations. The Buddhists and students were not satisfied; they formed
a mob oulside his office, to which he spoke briefly without further con-
cession. The mob failed to disperse, and the authorities left them alone.
Then without advance notice, military headquarters (Khanh) announced that
afternoon that Khanh had resigned, that the August 16 charter would be

ho. POP SECRET - Sensitive
