Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

of the governments concerned and within periods which shall be fixed

by agreement between the parties except in the cases where, by agree-
ment between the two parties, a certain number of French troops shall
remain at specified points and for a specified time.

"]1,. The Conference takes note of the declaration of the French
Government to the effect that for the settlement of all the problems
connected with the re-establishment and consolidation of peace in Cam-
bodia, Laos and Viet-Nam, the French Government will proceed from the
principle of respect for the independence and sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam.

"12, In their relations with Cambodia, Laos and Viet-Nam, each

“member of the Geneva Conference undertakes to respect the sovereignty,

the independence, the unity and the territorial integrity of the above-
mentioned states, and to refrain from any interference in their internal
affairs.

"13. The members of the Conference agree to consult one another on
any question which may be referred to them by the International Super-
visory Commission in order to study such measures as may: prove necessary
to ensure that the agreements on the cessation of hostilities in Can-
pbodia, Laos and Viet-Nem are respected."

16. Direct Aid to the Associated States: Communique Regardine Franco-
American Conversations, September 29, 1954, Department of State
Bulletin, October ll, 1954, De Ost:

"Representatives of the two Governments have had very frank and
useful talks which have shown the community of their views, and are
in full agreement on the objectives to be attained.

"The conclusion of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty
in Manila on September 8, 1954, has provided a firmer basis then hereto-
fore to assist the free nations of Asia in developing and maintaining
their independence and security. The representatives of France and the
United States wish to reaffirm the support of their Governments for the
principles of self-government, independence, justice and liberty pro-
claimed by the Pacific Charter in Manila on September 8, 1954.

"The representatives of France and the United States reaffirm the
intention of their governments to support the complete independence
of Cambodia, Laos, and Viet-Nam. Both France and the United States
will continue toc assist Cambodia, Lsos, and Viet-Nem in their efforts
to safeguard their freedom and independence and to advance the welfare
of their peoples. In this spirit France and the United States are
assisting’ the Government of Viet-Nam in the resettlement of the Viet-
namese who have of their own free will moved to free Viet-Nam and who
already number some 300,000.

B-25
