Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Therefore, I count on all concerned -- in Washington and
in Viet Nam -- to pull together in the national interest
to make this @rrangement work. 23/

This NSAM, of course, represented the fruition of what had been a
long-standing recommendation to consolidate Revolutionary Development
under the individual who possessed primary responsibility and controlled
the resources, COMUSMACV. However, in the estimation of many, especially
those who evaluated its later effectiveness and tried to determine
whether or not any real good had been accomplished by the reorganization,
it represented yet one more instance of the American penchant for
organizational tinkering, one which usually relieved the people making
the organizational changes from really getting down and rooting out
the basic causes of the problem. 2h/ The other interesting evaluation
concerned the question of what level of combat service support staffing
there should be in South Vietnam. In April, a number of studies were
made, all designed to try to determine whether the level of combat
service support was too high, about correct, or needed some revision in
the upward direction. 25/

Mr. Victor K. Heyman, Director of the SEA Programs Division in
the Office of the Assistant. Secretary of Defense (Systems Analysis),
toured the Vietnam area in early May and visited the First Logistical
Command. He was concerned generally whether manning levels were adequate
to the task assigned by COMUSMACV, and, specifically, whether or not
the new peak level of 70,000 men to be reached during Program 4 was
excessive. In his trip report, he observed that the Army Program }
strength of 322,000 included only 66,000 men in maneuver battalions.
Furthermore, if combat support, aviation companies, advisors, special
forces, division and brigade staffs, and construction battalions were
added, these increases would bring the "combat" total to only 165,000
men or 51% of the total Army force. He felt that the balance of 157,000
in other units appeared excessive and recommended to Secretary McNamara
that the JCS be asked to analyze it. —

In particular, United States Army Vietnam, First Logistical Com-
mand was scheduled to total, as we noted, approximately 70,000 men at
the peak of Program 4. This was the equivalent of nearly 5 Army divisions
or 70 infantry battalions. Furthermore, the First Log Command did not
include aviation supplies/maintenance units or construction battalions
and the substantial combat service support staffing which was organic
to divisions and separate brigades. To these increments must be added
the 40,000 man equivalent furnished by contractors, local national
employment and support from the off-shore bases. Although comparing
the services could be misleading because of different doctrines and
organizations, a rough comparison revealed that the Army ratio was
about one man in First Log Command to support 3.6 men in other USARV

132 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘
