Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

-- At peace with themselves, and at peace with all
others.

With such an Asia, our country -- and the world -- will
be far more secure than it is tonight.

I believe that a peaceful Asia is far nearer to
reality, because of what America has done in Vietnam.
I believe that the men who endure the dangers of battle --
fighting there for us tonight -- are helping the entire world
avoid far greater conflicts, far wider wars, far more destruc-
tion, than this one.

The peace that will bring them home some day will come.
Tonight I have offered the first in what I hope will be a
series of mutual moves toward peace.

I pray that it will not be rejected by the leaders of
North Vietnam. I pray that they will accept it as a means
by which the sacrifices of their own people may be ended.
And I ask your help and your support, my fellow citizens,
for this effort to reach across the battlefield toward an
early peace.

Listing the achievements of his administration and warning
against the perils of division in America, the President ended his speech
with his emotional announcement that he would not run for re-election.

Through all time to come, I think America will be a
stronger nation, a more just society, and a land of greater
opportunity and fulfillment because of what we have all done
together in these years of unparalleled achievement.

Our reward will come in the life of freedom, peace,
and hope that our children will enjoy through ages ahead.

What we won when all of our people united just must
not now be lost in suspicion, distrust, selfishness, and
politics among any of our people.

Believing this as I do, I have concluded that I should
not permit the Presidency to become involved’ in the partisan
divisions that are developing in this political year.

With America's sons in the fields far away, with
America's future under challenge right here at home, with
our hopes and the world’s hopes for peace in the balance
every day, I do not believe that I should devote an hour
or a day of my time to any personal partisan causes or to

202 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
