.
a ae ee A ap a NN ed See ge hime ert epee entero

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

existing there, the United States should take action, as a matter
of urgency, by a11 means practicable short of the actual employment
of United States military forces, to deny Indochina to communism.

4. It appears that the French are only now beginning to recog-
nize the military and political measures which must be undertaken in
order to secure the French position in Indochine. The French atti-
tudes and actions, however, must not be permitted to obscure the
United States interest in the solution of the Indochina problem.

5. it has been suggested that if the French remain in Indochina
thet country might be lost to communisin, regardless of the military
aid programs which the United States may implement. This thinking
presupposes either such a low order of military power in France and
her colonies as to make it utterly impossible for that nation to
cope with the Viet Minhs or such intransigence and unrealism in the
French Government as to preclude it from facing facts, Current
intelligence estimates do not accord France and her colonies this
low order of military power. While, up to this time, the attitude
of the Fronch Government toward French Indochina has been one of
temporization and consequently one of weakness, it is believed that
the seriousness of the situation, particularly the political situ-
ation, may now have been recognized by the French Government,

6. The United States should urge France to meet its responsi-
bility by taking the military, political, and economic action,
including the injection of new leadership, necessary to save Indo-
china from communism, If Franee decides to withdraw from French
Indochina, there would, in all probability, be only’a slight chance
that the United Nations could retrieve the situation in that country
in favor of the Western Powers.

7. The following are the three major courses with military
implications which might be adopted to achieve peace and security in
Indochina against either the internal threat of the Viet Minhs or
the external threat of Communist China:

a. Through armed action by France and the Associated States
of Indochina together with the forces of the United States and/or
other Western Powers 3

b. By armed action by France and the Associated States of
Indochina supported by United States military aid and assistance:
and .

. e. By United Nations action either under the United States-
sponsored resolution, "Uniting for Peace," or by French with-
drawal from Indochina and action by the United Nations similar
to that followed in the case of the Netherlands and Indonesia.

se Communist

a permit itself

the event of overt attack by organized Chin
orees ag iv

t
inst Indochina the United States should no
nge 64/1 ; TOP SECRET

b43
