Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

either through open invasion or by infiltrating sufficient
troops across the 17th Parallel to insure a successful
"liberation' -- would, jeopardize current Bloc peace policies
and risk provoking US intervention. In addition, the
Communists may not presently have sufficient strength in
South Vietnam quickly to overthrow the Diem government and
may therefore estimate that to undertake widespread guerrilla
warfare without substantial infiltration from the north might
lead not only to the weakening of their exposed organization in
the south but also to a drastic loss of public support."
(Ibid., p. 6)

However, a July 1956 NIE noted that if substantial
infiltration from the DRV were deemed necessary, it possessed the
resources:

" , . . Ninety-five thousand men were evacuated from
the south in the first few months following the Armistice.
The DRV probably views this group as a possible instrument
for subversive activity in South Vietnam and some may have
been retrained, reindoctrinated, and perhaps even
reinfiltrated.” (NIE 63-56, 17 July 1956, p- 6)

By March 1956, Diem had reduced the Cao Dai and Hoa
Hao groups to political impotence, and had won a substantial majority
in South Vietnam's first national elections: "no openly anti-Dien
Deputy was elected . . . due in part to government manipulation of
the election campaign, and in part to a boycott of the elections by
most of the opposition parties." (Ibid., p. 7)

The same NIE stated that it was likely that "organized
non-communist resistance" would virtually disappear by 1957 and,
indeed, that South Vietnam's military and security forces could
maintain "the government in power against any potential armed
opposition now located south of the 17th parallel,” even against
communist armed strength in the south estimated at "8,000 - 10,000,
with approximately 5,000 organized in skeletal company and battalion
sized units which could be expanded through recruitment." (Ibid.,
10-11) However, longer-run prospects of the regime still depended on
the decision of the North Vietnamese regime whether, and when, to
activiate their apparatus in the south and infiltrate "regroupees"
from the north.

" , . » In the event of large scale, concerted guerrilla
warfare supported by infiltration of men and supplies from the
north, relatively large areas of rural Vietnam probably would
be lost to government control... ." (Ibid., p. 10)

Alst TOP SECRET - Sensitive
