Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

people are important in themselves, but they assume an additional impor-
tance if the judgment is accepted that a success for aggression there
would drastically weaken the situation in Southeast Asia and indeed
beyond. That judgment cannot be defended solely by reference to the
dynamics of major aggressive powers and their prospective victims in the
past. Imyself believe that those parallels nave validity, Pee the
question is always what Justice Holmes called ‘concrete cases.' In
this concrete case I think the peut judgment has been valid and
remains valid today.

"None of us can say categorically that the Communist Chinese would
in due course move--if opportunity offered--to dominate wide areas of
Southeast Asia through pressure and subversion. But that is what the
Chinese and their maps say, and their Communist doctrine appears to add
vital additional emphasis. It is what they are doing in Thailand today
and, through local Communist allies, in Burma, Cambodia, Malaysia, and
Singapore. And it is what they would like to do in Indonesia again."

* x* *

74. Remarks by President Johnson to the National Legislative Conference
at San Antonio, Texas on September 29, 1967; "Answering Aggression
In Viet-Nam,” Department of State Publication 3305, East Asian

and Pacific Series 167, Released October 1967.

x * +

"Viet-Nam is also the scene of a powerful aggression that is
spurred by an appetite for conquest.

"Tt is the arena where Communist expansionism is most agesressively
at work in the world today--where it is crossing international frontiers
in violation of international agreements; where it is killing and kid-
naping; where it is ruthlessly attempting to bend free people to its will.

"Into this mixture of subversion and war, of terror and hope, America
has entered--with its material power and with its moral commitment.

"Why should three Presidents and the elected representatives of our
people have chosen to defend this Asian nation more than 10,000 miles
from American shores?

"We cherish freedom--yes. We cherish self-determination for all
people--yes. We abhor the political murder of any state by another and
the bodily murder of any people by gangsters of whatever ideology. And
for 27 years--since the days of lend-lease~-we have sought to strengthen
free people against domination by aggressive foreign powers.

P .

D-120
