LG)
3

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was probably based more on considerations of political feasibility. As
late as the 17th of July, Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance had cabled
McNamara that the President had OK'd the 34 Battalion Phase I Plan and
would try to "bull" the reserve call up through Senator Stennis whom he
saw as his chief obstacle on this issue. 19/ ‘The President's decision
was evidently a difficult one to make. Prior to McNemara's departure

for Saigon, both he and the President had hinted at press conferences
that a reserve call-up and higher draft calls were a distinct possibility.
This, of course, triggered the predictable response from some members of
Congress in opposition to a reserve call up. Upon MciNlamera's return from
Saigon, President Johnson waited over a week before he publicly announced
his Vietnam decisions. Since Vance's cable to McNamara of the 17th of
July indicated that the President had approved the 34 battalion deploy-
ment, it is probably reasonable to assume that the President spent much
of the week assessing the political variables of the situation. The
consensus in the press was that the announced measures were not as great
a leap as had been expected and that perhaps the attitude of influential
senate Democrats had restrained Johnson from taking stronger action.

The issue was not that pressing as far as Phase I was concerned because,
as the President pointed out, there were active Army units already
available to cover the short term needs.

C. Development of a Concept

he Concept for Vietnam

By late August 1965, the JCS had developed and coordinated a
Concept for Vietnam which was set out in JCSM 652-65 dated 27 August.
The heart of the concept is summarized as follows:

a. The objective in Vietnam, as stated by NSAM 288,
dated 17 March 1964, is a stable and independent noncomnu-
nist government.

b. The major problems to be dealt with in the conduct
of the war are:

(1) The continued direction and support of Viet
Cong operations by the DRV, infiltration from the north,
and the apparent attendant Viet Cong capability to pro-
vide materiel support and to replace heavy personnel
losses.

(2) The continued existence of a major Viet Cong
infrastructure, both political and military, in the RVI.

(3) Whe greater growth rate of Viet Cong strength

as compared to that of the South Vietnamese ground
forces.

ES _ OP SECRET - Sensitive
