Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

American strategy intent upon retaining the initiative (or gaining it)
would logically concentrate upon enemy actions which promised to contest
it. Giap's creation of "killing grounds" and "holding forces" were the
kind of initiatives which COMUSMACV believed he had to disrupt ("spoil")
before they materialized as integral parts of a coordinated strategy.

This kind of thinking would lead U.S. forces to the border region battles,
the clearing of in-country redoubts and sanctuaries and to major unit
commitments in I CTZ in the North.

One Pacifie commander during this time period, General Beach, put
his views on strategy and escalation in unequivocal terms. Determinedly,
he argued that we must "win" the war, and he outlined a plan which magni-
fied the issues central to the COMUSMACV strategy by its direct presentation
of the major ground strategy issues -- the sanctuaries, the infiltration
(and its relationship to the bombing), and the course which he believed
would best counter the enemy's strategy of tying down large numbers of
our forces away from the sensitive populated areas. ig/

The USARPAC commander also felt that operations in the base areas....

",.emust be pursued on 8 sustained basis and must fully
penetrate, thoroughly cover, and sanitize these areas. Sub-.
sequently, these areas must be denied to the enemy's reentry
by leaving behind occupying forces. Concurrently, forces
should be deployed astride major routes the enemy habitually
uses between these bases and to his sanctuaries to interdict
iis anovements.. Df the-enemyiwill stand and fight enywhere,: he
will stand end fight for these bases if they are seriously
threatened. Moreover, serious inroads into the enemy supply
base in SVN would tend to force the local guerrilla out of
his lair to provide increased support to the main forces, thus
facilitating our efforts to find, fix and destroy him. Des-
truction of .enemy in-country bases and tactical stockpiles
will have the most immediate adverse effect on enemy opera-
tions in SVN. COMUSMACV's campaign plan envisions such
operations. The suggestion of this headquarters relates
to ensuring that we penetrate the base areas completely and
then leave forces behind to prevent reoccupancy by the

enemy...." 20/

Beach accepted the “killing ground/holding" version of the enemy
strategic plan noting that:

",...The enemy is developing large forces in bases or
sanctuary north of the DMZ near I CTZ, and on Cambodia, in
the vicinity of Chu Pong Massif bordering II CTZ, and
opposite Tay Ninh/Binh Long Provinces in III CTZ. These
bases and forces. now politically beyond our reach, will

*

SHE Bene TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ee ee ee
