Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"]. We should certainly stress that the war is essentially
a_ Vietnamese responsibility, and this we have repeatedly done,
particularly in our announced policy on U.S. troop withdrawal.
At the same time we cannot disengage U.S. prestige to any sig-
nificant degree....

"2. The security situation is serious, but we can still win,
eyen on present ground rules....

WR --.-Any deal either to divide the present territory of

south Vietnam or to 'neutralize' South Vietnam would inevitably
mean a new government in Saigon that would in short order become
Communist-dominated.

"hk, The consequences of a Communist-dominated South Vietnam
are extremely serious both for the rest of Southeast Asia and
for the U.S. position in the rest of Asia and indeed in other
key areas of the world....

"5. Thus, the stakes in preserving an anti-Communist South
Vietnam are so high that, in our judgment, we must go on bending
every effort to win....And, I am confident that the American people
are by and large in favor of a policy of firmness and strength in
such situations." 57/

secretary McNamara in his testimony before Congress on the fiscal
year 1965 budget in early February, 1964, declined to link the previously
planned U.S. withdrawals with either "pessimism" or "optimism" regarding
events in Vietnam, saying simply that the withdrawals had all along been
conditioned upon Vietnamese capability to asswne full responsibility from
the U.S. trainers, and that there would be a "substantial reduction in
our force as we train them." Further:

"Iast fall...I wasn't as optimistic perhaps about the course
of the war as I was about being able to bring back our personnel
in certain numbers by the end of last year and also in increments
between then and the end of 1965.

"I still am hopeful of doing that. We did, of course, bring
back 1,000 men toward the latter part of last year. I am hopeful
we can bring back additional numbers of men later this year and
certainly next year. I say this because I personally believe
that this is a war that the Vietnamese must fight...I don't believe
we can take on that combat task for them. Ido believe we can ~
‘ carry out training. We can provide advice and logistical assistance.

"But after all, the training, by the very nature of the work,
comes to an end at a certain point. We will have started this
expanded training and carried it out for a period of 4 years, by
the end of next year. We started at the end of 1961. The end
of next.year will have been 4 years later and certainly we should

32 TOP SECRET.- Sensitive
