ne. |

ae

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

force oriented primarily toward conventional defense. The later
transition to a force designed for counterinsurgent warfare was
thereby made more difficult.

lt seemed for a while that the gamble against long odds had
succeeded. The Viet Minh were quiescent; the Republic of Vietnam
Armed Forces (RVNAF) were markedly better armed and trained than
they were when the U.S. effort began (at which time they were un-
armed arid untrained), and President Ngo Dinh Diem showed a remarkable
ability to put down factions threatening GVN stability and to maintain
himself in office.

This period of apparent stability disappeared, however, in the
events of 1949-51 as the Viet Minh (relabelled Viet Cong =~ a contrac~
tion for Vietnamese Communist) stepped up terrorism, sabotage, and
military action by increasingly large units. By mid-1961, the prospect
for South Vietnam's independence was at least as dark as it had been
six years earlier.

But the U.S. military advisors in Vietnam had learned ~~ or at
least thought they had learned -- during this period of gradual dis~
integration the true nature of the battle in which they were engaged
by proxy. This was an unconventional, internal war of counterinsurgency
rather than a conventional struggle against an external foe. It was a
battle for the "hearts and minds'' of the indigenous (and especially the
rural) population rather than a contest to win and hold key terrain
features. [It was an intermeshed political-economic-military war rather
than one in which political and economic issues were settled by military
victory.

U.S. advisors in Vietnam ~- and U.S. military and civilian theorists
in other places, as well == formulated during this period a rudimentary
doctrine of counterinsurgent warfare. In response to Premier Khrushchev's
endorsement of "wars of national liberation'' they proposed to help free
world nations save themselves from communism by a series of sequential
actions that dealt with the symptoms of social revolution (the insurgency)
as well as its causes (the frustration of expectations for social justice).

Thus, at almost the same time that the U.S. began its advisory build-
up in South Vietnam in late 1961, military and civilian practitioners
found themselves in possession of a simple, apparently logical, outline
sketch of a method by which to counter the communist~captured insurgency.
Physical security from the acts of the insurgents was a necessary but not
a sufficient condition for success. In addition to security the Vietnamese
government had to establish the services which would link it in classic
terms of legitimacy to its subjects. We would fight fire with fire and we
would fight it with water, too.

THE LIMITED PARTNERSHIP.

The decisions made by the Kennedy Administration from mid-1961 onward,

ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
