Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Hanoi and the Insurgency in South Vietnam (Tab 3)

The primary question concerning Hanoi's role in the origins of
the insurgency is not so much whether it played a role or not -- the
evidence of direct North Vietnamese participation in subversion against
the Government of South Vietnam is now extensive -- but when Hanoi intervened
in a systematic way. Most attacks on U.S. policy have been based on the
proposition that the DRV move on the South came with manifest reluctance,
and after massive U.S. intervention in 1961. For example, George
McTurnin Kahin and John W. Lewis, in their book The United States in
Vietnam, state that:

"Contrary to United States policy assumptions, a1] available
evidence shows that the revival of the civil war in the South
in 1958 was undertaken by Southerners at their own -- not
Hanoi's -- initiative. . . . Insurgency activity against the
Saigon government began in the South under Southern leadership
not as a consequence of any dictate from Hanoi, but contrary
to Hanoi's injunctions." *

As discussed above, so much of this argument as rests on the existence
in South Vietnam of genuine rebellion is probably valid. The South
Vietnamese had both the means, the Viet Minh residue, and motive to
take up arms against Ngo Dinh Diem. Moreover, there were indications
that some DRV leaders did attempt to hold back southern rebels on the
grounds that "conditions" were not ripe for an uprising. Further, there
was apparently division within the Lao Dong Party hierarchy over the
question of strategy and tactics in South Vietnam. However, the evidence
indicates that the principal strategic debate over this issue took place
between 1956 and 1958; all information now available (spring, 1968)
points to a decision taken by the DRV leaders not later than spring,
1959, actively to seek the overthrow of Diem. Thereafter, the DRV
pressed toward that goal by military force and by subversive aggression,
both in Laos and in South Vietnam.

But few Administration critics have had access to the classified
information upon which the foregoing judgments are based. Such intel-
ligence as the U.S. has been able to make available to the public bearing
on the period 1954-1960 has been sketchy and not very convincing: a few
captured documents, and a few prisoner interrogations. Indeed, up until
1961 the Administration itself publicly held that Ngo Dinh Diem was
firmly in control in South Vietnam, and that the United States aid programs
were succeeding in meeting such threat to GVN security as existed both
within South Vietnam and from the North. Too, the vigorous publicizing
of "wars of national liberation" by N. S. Khrushchev and the "discovery"
of counterinsurgency by the Kennedy Administration in early 1961 tended
to reinforce the overall public impression that North Vietnam's aggression
was news in that year. Khrushchev's speech of 6 January 1961, made,
according to Kennedy biographer Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., "a conspicuous

* The United States in Vietnam, pp. 119-120.

eh TOP SECRET - Sensitive
