Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

X. APRIL 7th INITIATIVE -- THE BILLION DOLLAR CARROT
A. Mounting Public Criticism

During the latter half of March and the beginning of April, from
near and far more and more brickbats were being hurled at the Administra-
tions's position on Vietnam. At home, columnist Walter Lippman raised
his voice to observe that U.S. policy “is all stick and no carrot. We
are telling the North Vietnemese that they will be very badly hurt if
they do not quit...But we are not telling the North Vietnamese what kind
of future there would be for them and the rest of Indochina if the war
ended as we think it should end.”

Abroad, in an empty but well-publicized gesture, philosopher
Jean-Paul Sartre canceled-a lecture trip to the U.S. on the ground that
Gallup polls indicated most Americans are in favor of the air raids into
North Vietnam. "Where contradictory opinions thus have hardened,” said
the reluctant Nobel Prize winner, "dialogue is impossible." And in a
considerably more potent gesture, the government of Charles de Gaulle
chose this particular juncture to renew its annual trade agreement with
North Vietnam and to extend Hanoi medium-term credits for the purchase
of French goods.

Within the Administration there was a growing feeling that somewhere
along the line the hand had been misplayed, that somehow the mix of
increased military pressure and increased diplomatic efforts for settle-
ment had not been right. In late March, therefore, the President began
to try to alter the mix. He began by spending much time on efforts at
personal persuasion, talking to Congressmen and other visitors in his
office about the restraint and patience he was showing in operation
ROLLING THUNDER. Evans and Novak 111/ describe one of these sessions as
follows:

To illustrate his caution, he showed critics the map of
North Vietnam and pointed out the targets he. had.approved for
attack, and to the many more targets he had disapproved. As
for Communist China, he was watching for every possibie sign
of reaction. Employing a vivid sexual analogy, the President
explained to friends and critics one day that the slow esca-
lation of the air war in the North and the increasing pressure
on Ho Chi Minh was seduction, not rape. If China should
suddenly react to slow escalation, as a woman might react to
attempted seduction, by threatening to retaliate (a slap in the
face, to centinue the metaphor), the United States would have
plenty of time to ease off the bombing. On the other hand, if

; the United States were to unleash an all-out, total assault on
the North - rape rather’ than seduction - there could be no
turning back, and Chinese reaction might be instant and total.
Johnson's language left nothing to the imagination and shocked
those who heard it. It made an unforgettable image. The
United States was engaged in a period of testing against Ho
Chi Minh, but the exercise was seduction, not rape.

94 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
