Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

C-0-P-¥

and spirit, enthusiastically welcomed them and manifested their desire

to maintain their unity for the grandeur of the Fatherland once lost

and now found again. On September 2, 1945, the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam was solemnly proclaimed. Twice, first through Emperor Bao-Dai

of the NGUYEN Dynasty, then, through the solemn proclamation of the new
Government on Independence Day, the new State abrogated all the treaties
formerly forced upon us by the French victors. The new Republic of Vietnam,
thus legally instituted, is in the reconstruction of the world a factor of
peace and progress. She is entitled for her safeguard to refer to the
most sacred principles of SAN FRANCISCO and ATLANTIC Charters. She is
based on and draws her strength from, the first of SUN YAT SEN's Three
Principles and the second, fourth, sixth points of President TRUMAN's
twelve-point declaration.

III.- But, on September 23, 1945, the French troops attacked Saigon,
starting an invasion which is now in its fifth month. That invasion is
menacing North Vietnam and French troops have begun to filter through our
Chinese frontier. That aggression, carried on by an experienced and
numerous army, fully equipped with the most recent inventions of modern
warfare, has brought about the destruction of our towns and villages, the
assassination of our civilian population, the starving of a great part of
our country. Untold atrocities have been committed, not as reprisals
upon our guerrillas troops, but on women and children and unarmed old
people. These atrocities are beyond imagination and beyond words, and
remind one of the darkest ages: assault on the sanitary formations, on
Red Cross personnel, bombing and machine-gunning of villages, raping of
women, looting and indiscriminate pillaging of Vietnam and Chinese houses,
etc... Yet, despite the maltreatments of the civilian population, we have, -
for 5 long months, opposed a stubborn resistance, fought in the worst
conditions, without food, medicine and without clothings. And we shall
carry on, sustained by our faith in international honour, and in our final
victory.

IV.- In the free zone of our national territory, especially in the
area under Chinese control, North of the 16th parallel, our civilians have
set out to work. The results of these five months of building-up work
are most favourable and give rise to the brightest hopes.

First of all, democracy has been established on solid foundations.
On January 6 last, general elections were organized with the greatest
success. In a few days 400 representatives of the entire country will hold
the first session of the Constituent National Assembly. A new administrative
organization has replaced the old mandarinate system. The most unpopular
taxes have been abolished. The anti-illiteracy campaign organized along
efficient lines, has yielded unexpectedly optimistic results. The primary
and secondary schools as well as the University have been reopened to more
and more numerous students. Peace and order are restored and smoothly
maintained. :

C-0-P-Y

C-99
