Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

within South Vietnam by actions against North Vietnam, actions which
it had been hoped would lead to a unity within South Vietnam impos-
Sible under the current circumstances, There was a CAS report, for
instance, of coup plotting on 2) July that said a decision had been
made by the generals to remove Khanh, but that it was not clear who
would replace him or whether the planned removal would be opposed, 109/
This wes the seme day that the Ambassador, who had scarcely been in
Saigon a fortnight, had first protested +o Khanh concerning his in-
discreet remarks about a march to the north, The Ambassador also
talked to Khanh, following the Mission Council meeting, concerning

the rumors of a possible coup. Khanh said that because he (Taylor-- .
i.e., the U.S) had imposed Minh on the MRC as Chief of State, and
because of Minh's support of Generals Kim and Xuan and other parti-
sans of French neutralist policies, Defense Minister Khiem and Chief
of State Thieu were leading a group that was pressing Khanh to get rid
of Minh, This Khiem block was permeated by Dai Viet political in-
fluence, Khanh asked Taylor if he should resign. Taylor said the USG
could not contemplate the consequences of another change of government.
Because no other leader was in sight, Khanh had our support and he must
continue in the face of adversity. "Could we help?" Taylor inquired,
Khanh asked that we let it be known that we wanted no more changes of
government and asked Taylor to talk to Khiem and his supporters about
the bad effects of politics in the armed forces. 110/

One means of demonstrating U.S. support of Khanh was to let Khanh
make the first announcement of increased U.S, aid, followed by a back-
ground statement by the Ambassador, To carry this out, the Ambassador
submitted a draft statement for Khanh to use. One part of this draft
statement mentioned the increase of U.S. military advisors and their
extension "to the district level." When Taylor and Johnson discussed
this with Khanh at Dalat two days later, Khanh saw advantages to the
proclamation in general, but preferred to change the reference "ad-
visors at the district evel" to read ‘advisors throughout the provin-
ces", because the original suggested an undesirably deep penetration
of the GVN by the U.S, aa

When Ambassador Taylor on 25 duly reported further on Khanh's
revival of the march to the north theme, he interpreted it as re-
sponse to political and morale problems. within South Vietnam. The
Ambassador suggested several possible motivation 1s, and commented that
if Khanh had been reasonably sincere his objective probably was to:

e«etalk “march north" but really have in mind get-
ting U.S. committed to program of reprisal bombing,
Such a-limited program could be first step to further
escalation against Hanoi. 112/

On 10 August, when the storm clouds had already appeared but
before the gale had begun to blow, Ambassador Taylor filed his first
monthly U.S, mission report. The. report began by expressing surprise
that the first sampling of advisor-~level opinion revealed more :

aor sts
3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
