Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

formal joint usG/GVN organization at the top; McNamara hoped that a more
formal organization would evolve. Lodge felt that the usG/GVvN relationship
wes harmonious, and that GVN was responsive to advice. He like the present
methods of dealing with them. Westmoreland called the military picture
"tenuous but not hopeless" and added that a few victories were badly needed.
Both were more optimistic than was the prevailing Washington view. '78/

All present agreed that the emergence of a hostile government
or anarchy would be a major threat to the U.S. position. 79/ The fear of
this threat undoubtedly helps explain the USG's persistent hesitancy to
apply leverage to GVN,

Westmoreland circulated a working paper calling for moderate in-
creases in U.S. personnel, both civilian and military, for eight critical
provinces. He reported that the GVN had recently responded to massive
advisory pressure by increasing the tempo of their military operations.
He felt they would similarly respond to a continuing advisory program
oriented toward pacification. Both Lodge and Westmoreland rejected, as
both unwise and unacceptable to GVN, any major plan for "inter-larding"
or "“encadrement" which would move U.S. personnel directly into decision-
making roles. Their opposition ended conference consideration of the ~
proposals advanced by the Sullivan memorandum.

In @ long draft memorandum, dated June 13, 1964, Sullivan added
some furthe insight into US/GVN relations and into the views of Lodge and
Westmoreland about national priorities, beyond what is shown in the CINCPAC
record of the Conference.

"In attempting to accomplish many of these programs,
we have encountered resistance both from the Vietnamese and
from our own U.S, Mission. Ambassador Lodge...fears that the
increased introduction of Americans would give a colonial
coloration to our presence there and would cause the Vietnamese
to depend more and more on our execution of their programs.
The Vietnamese...have some fear of appearing to be American
puppets...Finally, there is some indication that they are
reluctant to associate themselves too closely with the Ameri-
cans until they feel more confident of ultimate American
intentions.

"At the current moment, there is great doubt and confusion
in Vietnam about U.S. determination...As a leading Saigon
newspaper said on June 12: ‘We must be vigilant and we must
be ready to meet any eventuality so as to avoid the possible
shemeful sacrifice and dishonor to our country as in the

past.’

"Given this sort of atmosphere in South Vietnam, it is
very difficult to persuade the Vietnamese to commit themselves
to sharp military confrontations with the communists if they
suspect that something in the way of ea negotiated deal is being

» 26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
