Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the United States and of world peace that there be peace in Southeast
Asia. Ten years earlier the Senate had approved our SEATO Treaty with
only one dissenting vote in the Senate.

"Now, the basis for these alliances that we made in the Pacific
was that the security of those areas was vital to the security of the
United States. We did not go into these alliances as a matter of
altruism, to do someone else a favor. We went into them because we
felt that the security of Australia and the United States, New Zealand
and the United States, was so interlinked that we and they ought to have
an alliance with each other, and similarly with the other alliances we
have in the Pacific, as with the alliance in NATO. So that these alli-
ances themselves rest upon a4 sense of the national security interests of
the United States and not just on a fellow feeling for friends in some
other part of the world."

ek ae

71- Address by Under Secretary of State Katzenbach before the Fairfield
University Progress Dinner at Fairfield, Connecticut, October 17,
19675 "The Complex and Difficult Problems in Viet-Nam, " Department
of State Bulletin, November 6, 1907, p- ;

x * =x

"These commitments--both legal and moral--are so solidly founded
that I cannot see how anyone can rightly argue that we should renege on
them.

"They are rooted in the Geneva Accords of 1954, at the conclusion
of which the United States formally stated that we ‘would view any renewal
of the aggression...with grave concern and as seriously threatening inter-
national peace and security’; rooted in the SEATO treaty, which applies
+o South Viet-Nam through a protocol annexed to it; and rooted in numerous
other assurances, including President Kennedy's statement of August 2, 1961,
that ‘the United States is determined that the Republic of Viet-Nam shall
not be lost to the Communists for lack of any support which the United
States Government can render.'

"Our commitments to South Viet-Nam are far better grounded than
were those to South Korea at the time of the aggresstion there. For this
reason, I am puzzled as to why so many liberals who supported President
Truman in a policy of limited war in Korea now oppose a parallel policy
in Viet-Nem. The objectives of such a policy have seldom been as clearly
and precisely stated as they were by Richard Rovere and Arthur Schlesinger
(The General and the President,' Farrar, Straus & Young) in 1951. They
said:

"The objective is not to destroy communism everywhere, a goal
which would involve an unlimited ideological crusade, or even to destroy

p-129
