Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a principal subordinate Party headquarters on Ca Mau Peninsula called
the Central Office for South Vietnam (COSVN), headed by Le Duan. 138/
However, the 1951 statutes of the Lao Dong Party, like other DRV
official pronouncements, recognized in principle no separate identity for
South Vietnam or South Vietnamese communists. 139/ It was the lao Dong
Party cadre which sorted out the southern Viet Minh for regroupment or
stay-behind missions, and the regroupees themselves felt that their fate
was thereafter in the hands of the Lao Dong leaders. 140/

As the Viet Minh military apparatus was dismantled, COSVIN
was apparently closed down. There is convincing evidence, however,
that from 1955 on, there were two Party headquarters -- or at least com-
munications centers -- in South Vietnam, each communicating directly
with Iao Dong headquarters in Hanoi. 141/ One of these was located in
"Nam Bo" (South Zone), the other was Located in "Trung Bo" (Central
Zone, Region Five). Captured documents and prisoners indicate that
these headquarters were active in handling the infiltration between
North and South Vietnam in the years immediately after Geneva; they
are also mentioned as the site of conferences between southern Viet-
namese and northern leaders like Le Duan and Van Tien Dung. 142/

While prisoners and captured documents have established these links
between Hanoi and the South, reports are too few in number and insuf-
ficiently comprehensive to warrant the conclusion that Hanoi was always
in a position to dictate or even manipulate events in South Vietnam;
they do offer persuasive evidence that the Iao Dong Party continued
conspiratorial, political, and military activities in South Vietnam
throughout the years 1954 to 1960. Moreover, the documents and
interrogations are supported by circumstantial evidence. The village
level organization of the Viet Cong, even that in the early years of
the insurgency, VC propaganda techniques, and the terror-persuasion
methodology employed by the early Viet Cong, all closely followed the
doctrine of the Lao Dong Party. 143/ The eventual appearance of @
"front" structured like the Fatherland Front; the reiteration by
Cong of propaganda themes being trumpeted by Hanoi; and indications
of preoccupation within the Viet Cong leadership over following the
Lao Dong Party line also support the conclusion that the Party was
playing a significant role in the mounting rebellion against Diem.

In 1961, when the People's Revolutionary Party of South
Vietnam came into being, there was some effort in both North and South .
to portray it as an indigenous South Vietnamese party, independent of
the Iao Dong. But documents and prisoners have since proved that if
this were the case, neither the Viet Cong hierarchy nor rank-and-file
believed it so. A document captured in 1962, a provincial party
directive, stated that the creation of the PRP "is only a matter of
strategy . . . to deceive the enemy ... Our party is nothing but the
Lao Dong Party of Vietnam, unified from North to South, under the
direction of the Central Executive Committee of the Party, the chief of
which is President Ho." 144/ Another party directive captured in 1966
provided that: "the masses who have good sympathy towards the Party
should be well informed that the Lao Dong Party and the People's
Revolutionary Party are one party headed by the Central Committee with

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
