Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Excerpt from Vietnam: A Diplomatic Tragedy by Victor Bator, 1965

Pages 226-227

In spite of the dangerous geographic proximity of China and the earlier
dependence of Ho Chi Minh on Chinese military support, there was, in 1954,
some possibility that Ho Chi Minh's government might have been amenable to
diplomatic contacts looking to real stabilization. He had in his govern-
ment several non-Marxists who might have helped such an undertaking. Viet-
nam's millennial history is filled with intermittently successful attempts
to free the country from Chinese domination. "The most important question
facing both North and South Vietnam," wrote an anti-Diem and anti-Communist
Vietnamese of high repute, "is how to safeguard the future of the whole
Vietnamese nation now threatened by such number and such great dynamism
(of the Chinese)."

North Vietnam's double-satellite relationship (to Moscow and Peking)
potentially creates a limited measure of independence from both. ‘The Viet-
namese Communists turned to Russia and her European satellites for the
help they needed after Geneva in order to recover from the devastations:
of a seven-year civil war. With this help North Vietnam may now be increas-
ingly independent of China. Even if the rank and file of the leadership
were impervious to the pride of independence, it is a safe assumption that
Ho Chi Minh himself, now an "elder statesman" of the Communist world, is
not unlike other national leaders: He most certainly does not enjoy being
a mere puppet. He seems to have the talent and subtlety to maneuver between
the Scylla and Charybdis of commitment to China and Russia. Thus, diplo-
macy directed at real neutralization of Vietnam, even if not fully approved
by Peking, might have achieved some success in the years 1955-1960. Of
course, to the irreconcilable fanatic, Diem, any contact with Ho Chi Minh
would have been anathema. But American policy was not necessarily condemned
to serve Mr. Diem's nervous system, especially since there was plenty of
opposition to him among his own countrymen.

0-20 - TOP SECRET - Sensitive
