Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and sovereign non-Communist nation. In particular, the
uncovering of the Laotian-Viet Nam border to DRV or DRV-
supported forces creates a serious threat of increased
covert infiltration of personnel, supplies, and equipment
to the Viet Cong. With such increased support, the Viet
Cong undoubtedly hope to seize firm military control of
@ geographic area and announce the establishment therein
of a "rebel" government for South Viet Nam which would
then be recognized by and receive military support from
the DRV, Communist China, and Soviet Russia. (Example:
The present situation in Laos.)

The joint VN-US group does not consider itself com-
petent to make specific recommendations as to desired
force levels for the defense of Viet Nam. They have,
however, after consultation with their respective mili-
tary authorities, adopted for economic planning purposes
certain estimated strength figures for the GVN armed
forces under two alternative assumptions. Alternative A
assumes that the Communist-led insurgency effort remains
at approximately its present level of intensity and the
Goverment of Laos maintains sufficient independence from
the Communist Bloc to deny authority for the transit of
DVN or Communist Chinese troops across its borders.
Alternative B assumes that the Viet Cong are able to
Significantly increase their insurgency campaign within
Viet Nam and that the situation in Laos continues to
deteriorate to the point where the Communists gain de facto
control of that country.

Alternative A called for a build-up of Diem's forces to 200,000
(vs. 170,000 then authorized). Alternative B called for continuing the
build-up to 270,000. On this basis, Kennedy agreed to provide support
for the increase to 200,000. The 200,000-man approval was supposed to -
be contingent on South Vietnamese agreement to a plan for using the
forces. The question of a further increase to 270,000 was deferred,
since it did not need to be faced until the lower figure was being
approached, sometime late in 1962. 6/

A consequence of the Staley Mission was the South Vietnamese troop
levels needed little attention in the fall review: the U.S. simply
decided to support the increase to 200,000 even though the agreed plan
for using the forces did not yet exist (as in May the U.S. had agreed to
support the increase to 170,000 which also, it will be recalled, was
supposed to have been contingent on such a plan).

A few points about the Staley Mission seem useful to keep in mind
in reviewing the fall process; i

6
2 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
