Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

State suggested decentralization of pacification control to Corps and
Province, to bypass the central government; USOM disagreed. MACV con-
tacted all senior RVNAF officers and found them taking a responsible atti-
tude toward continuing the war effort; however, MACV noted that the coup
leaders had talked the same way just before the September 13 coup attempt.
Therefore MACY was candidly sceptical. T/

In response, & COMUSMACV memorandum of November 14 entitled
"Assumption by US of Operational Control of the Pacification Program in
SVN," states his position on the US role and is indicative of his later
views on conibined command. He recognized that any plan to encourage GVN
in its efforts should include measures for developing US approved plans,
as well as means for controlling money and people during execution of plans,
and he envisaged an arrangement whereby GVN agencies would be provided
complete planning guidance. He saw a danger of exerting influence over
GVN which might be interpreted as excessive and which might boomerang
on US interests. Instead, he suggested,"as a less drastic alternative,
the Hop Tac idea, might be extended to each of the other three tactical =|
ZONES «

As discussed more fully in Re-emphasis on Pacification 1965-67,
Hop Tac (working together) was formally proposed at a high level in the
US government by Ambassador Lodge on his way home in July 196). Ambassador
Taylor and General Westmoreland implemented the idea, It tied together
the pacification plans of the seven provinces around Saigon to insure
security and extend govermment control. A headquarters for US Hop Tac

‘elements was established in Saigon. The Vietnamese set up a parallel

organization primarily to satisfy the US, for their group had no authority
or influence.

Meanwhile, the US/GVN study and planning activity continued and
gave the impression of accomplishment. A US/GVN Survey Team reviewed
RVNAF structure requirements for supporting the GVN National Pacification
Plan. After visits to each corps headquarters, it proposed two alterna-
tive force increases, one to achieve progress in priority one Hop Tac-
areas, the other to attain more overall progress. On November 24, COMUSMACV
formally requested approval of the first alternative from CINCPAC while
at the same time the US Embassy recommended approval to the State Depart-
ment. 72/ Meetings of USOM/NSC mentioned above (pp. 32 and 39) continued
till December 5, after which the crisis of the Ambassador's return and its
sequel stopped all pretense of joint pacification planning for several
weeks. 73/

But the Joint General Staff accepted all. MACV suggestions on how
RVNAF should be employed to improve the pacification program and issued
its implementing Directive A-B 139 as a Christmas present on December 25,
1964, in mid-crisis. 74/ ‘

The USMACV staff reviewed the RVN Defense Budget for 1965 and
US Mission approval was received in late 1964. However, on order of the

. Ambassador, due to the political crisis, MACV withheld the budget from

GVN until Janvary 13, 1965. 75/

62 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
