Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The most propitious course of action to emerge from the analysis
in the Estimate was the second one dealing with the commitment of up to
two U.S. divisions, including 17 maneuver battalions, with support. Over
and above what was in or authorized to be in Vietnam, Course of Action 2
called for an additional 33,000 men.

In order to illustrate trends in force ratios, Westmoreland
postulated that one USMC BLT was the equivalent of three ARVN battalions,
and one U.S. Army battalion was the equivalent of two ARVN battalions.
Using that rationale, the combat battalions added on through Course of
Action 2 would have amounted to 38 ARVN battalion-equivalents. Input on
that scale would have had a fair effect on force ratios overall and a very
dramatic effect locally in the areas where they were to operate.

Without the benefit of the increased battalion-equivalents pro-
vided by Course of Action 2, the ratio of ARVN (and the two Marine BLT's
then in Vietnam) battalions to Viet Cong battalions would have degraded,
according to the Estimate, from 1.7 to 1 in March 1965 to 1.6 to 1 in
December of that year. This would have been the case despite an acceler-
ated RVNAF build-up and only a modest rate of Viet Cong build-up as in
1964. With the input of Course of Action 2, the equivalent of a 10 month
acceleration in the RVNAF build-up could have been accomplished by mid-
year and by the end of the build-up period the forces could have been
doubled -- that is, assuming that the forces in Course of Action 2 were
introduced during April, May, and June, a proposal which was barely
feasible logistically and which was urged by General Westmoreland.

At the conclusion of his Estimate, General Westmoreland recom-
mended that the U.S. build up its combat force in Vietnam to 17 battalions
by early June at the latest. He rejected the enclave alternative because
it was too negative, because it brought U.S. troops into too intimate
contact with the population, and because it posed some almost insurmount-
able problems in real estate acquisition. In the highlands the U.S. troops
would have had no difficulty recognizing the enemy among the few montag-
nards who lived there, therefore Westmoreland recommended that a full U.S.
division be deployed along the Qui Nhon-Pleiku axis with a brigade each
at An Khe, Pleiku, and Kontum. This deployment would have altered the
force ratios in the critical IT Corps from 1.9:1 to 2.9:1 in favor of the
RVNAF immediately. The ports of Qui Nhon and Nha Trang, rather than
serving as enclave bases, would, according to the recommendation, have
been developed as logistic support bases for the forces in the highlands
and would have been provided with a battalion each for security. The
rest of the 17 battalions were to provide base and installation security
in the Da Nang/Hue (4 USMC BLT's) and the Bien Hoa-Vung Tau (3 Army
battalions) areas,

This was the position of COMUSMACV in March 1965. In concluding
his Estimate, Westmoreland recognized the possibility that the GVN might

88 ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
