SLL

116.

IT <

118.

119.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

U.S. aid (e.g., through France). Obstaclesshould not per-
mit indecision to allocate aid money or materials; the
“orux of the situation lies in prompt decisive action if =
desired political effect is to be attained." Griffin file

copy of telegram sent to Acheson, 16 March 1950......-++000. 292

The U.S. assumes-that France is determined to protect
Indochina from communist encroachment, that success de-
pends on indigenous support, and that France supports Bao
Dai, but that the French position and ultimate intentions
are not clear to the rest of the world. The U.S. requests
France to make a public statement of the concessions to
Indochinese nationalism. Acheson 1363 to Paris, 29 March
LOGO. access Ses sWiaieseskaed reGevsewsesesaseusevecsneseuaenec | Ot
Acheson advises ‘Griffin Mission of the implications for U.S.
policy in Vietnam: (1) The prospect of U.S. aid indirectly

would cause crisis (induce hyper-confidence in Viets) ;

(2) Viets bitter at Huu appointment (and the U.S.) may

magnify the U.S. role; (3) it is better for the U.S. ifa
national union government is set up; and (4) the aid program

can more easily be worked out with Huu Government. Acheson

Bul te Grigtin, 9 Rpvid 1990) sc. ceseseskesse eevee wexstseenn) 305

Department of State requests an assessment of the strategic
aspects of Indochina from a military point of view because

of the threat of communist domination. The Joint Chiefs of

Staff indicate that the "mainland states of Southeast Asia

also are at present of critical strategic importance to the

United States,” because of the requirement to stockpile

strategic materials acquired there, as well as the threat

to other states on the "line of containment." JCS Memoran-

dum for the Secretary of Defense, 10 April 1950........220+- 308

The Joint Chiefs of Staff concur with the State Department

on the importance of Southeast Asia to the U.S. However,

the JCS urge a more forceful and positive U.S. position

than expressed by State -- "....in order to retrieve the

losses resulting from previous mistakes on the part of the

British and French, as well as to preclude such mistakes in

the future, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider it necessary

that positive and proper leadership among the Western

Powers be assumed by the United States in Southeast Asia

matters." OCS Memorandum for SecDef, 2 May 1950.....ees000. 315

The JCS recommend telling the French that the U.S. is pre-

pared to assist France and the three Associated States and

that arrangements for U.S. military aid be made. JCS

Memorandum for SecDef, 2 May 1950. ccecccccsveseccesvecesnccee 310

xviii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
