Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

«

a

This group has successfully extended its influence to'include practically all armed
forces now fighting the I'rench, thus in effect capturing control of the nationalist
movement. a

The French on two occasions during 1946 attempted to resolve the problem
by negotiation with the government established and dominated by Ho Chi Minh,
The general agreements reached were not, however, successfully implemented
and widescale fighting subsequently broke out. Since early in 1947, the French
have employed about 115,000 troops in Indochina, with little result, since the
countryside except in Laos and Cambodia remains under the firm control of
the Ho Chi Minh government. <A series of French-established puppet govern-
ments have tended to enhance the prestige of Ho’s government and to call into
question, on the part of the Vietnamese, the sincerity of French intentions to
accord an independent status to Vietnam.

j. PourricaL

We have regarded these hostilities in a colonial area as detrimental not
only to our own long-term interests which require as a minimum a stable
Southeast Asia but also detrimental to the interests of France, since the hatred
engendered by continuing hostilities may render impossible peaceful collabora-
tion and cooperation of the French and the Vietnamese peoples. This hatred
of the Vietnamese people toward the French is keeping alive anti-western feeling
among oriental peoples, to the advantage of the USSR and the detriment of
the US.

We have not urged the I'rench fo negotiate with Ho Chi Minh, even though
he probably is now supported by a considerable majority of the Vietnamese
people, because of his record as a Communist and the Communist background
of many of the influential figures in and about his government. .

Postwar French governments have never understood, or have chosen to
underestimate, the strength of the nationalist movement with which they must
deal in Indochina. It remains possible that the nationalist movement can
be subverted. from Communist control but this will require granting to a non-
Communist group of nationalists at least the same concessions demanded by
Ho Chi Minh. ‘The failure of French governments to deal successfully with the
Indochinese question has been due, in large measure, to the overwhelming
internal issues facing France and the French Union, and to foreign policy
considerations in Europe. These factors have combined with the slim parlia-
mentary majorities of postwar governments in France to militate against the
‘bold moves necessary to divert allegiance of the Vietnamese nationalists to non- ,
Comrounist leadership. . eee

In accord with our policy of regarding with favor the efforts of dependent
peoples to attain their legitimate political aspirations, we have been anxious to
see the French accord to the Vietnamese the largest possible degree of political
and economic independence consistent with legitimate French interests. We
have therefore declined to permit the export to the French in Indochina of arms
and munitions for the prosecution of the war against the Vietnamese. This

ag |

—
