Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Hanoi~Haiphong logistic base" by interdicting the LOCs and concurrently’
attacking the “remaining reservoir of war-supporing resources" and the
flow of men and materials to the South. The import of war-sustaining
material would be obstructed and reduced, movement on rails, roads, and
inland waterways would be degraded, "air terminals" would be disrupted,
storage areas and stockpiles would be destroyed, and movement South
would be curtailed. The campaign would impair NVN's ability to control,
direct, and support the insurgency in the South. NVN would be under
increasing pressure to seek a political rather than a military solution
to the war. 118/

At the end of May the Chiefs sent the Secretary their
response to the DPM. The Chairman sent McNamara a memo with a line-in,
line-out factual correction of the DPM that did not comment on policy.
Tts most significant change was to raise the total troop figure in option
A (Westy's 4-2/3 Division request) from 200,000 to 250,000. 119/ On
the lst of June the Secretary received the Chiefs collective views on
the substantive policy recommendations of the DPM. As might have been
expected, they were the stiffest kind of condemnation of the proposals.
The JCS complained that the DPM passed off option A and its supporting
arguments as the views of the military when in fact they were a distortion
of those views,

Course A is an extrapolation of a number of proposals
which were recommended separately but not in combination or
as interpreted in the DPM. The combination force levels,
deployments, and military actions of Course A do not accurately
reflect the positions or recommendations of COMUSMACV, CINCPAC,
or the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The positions of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, which provide a better basis against which to
compare other alternatives, are set forth in JCSM-218-67,
JCSM 286-67, and JCSM-288-67. 120/

While they may have been annoyed at what they felt was a misrepresentation
of their views on the best course of action for the U.S., the Chiefs were
outraged by the compromising of U.S. objectives in the DPM:

Objectives. The preferred course of action addressed
in the DPM (Course B) is not consistent with NSAM 288 or
with the explicit public statements of US policy and objec-
tives enumerated in Part I, Appendix A, and in Appendix B.
The DEM would, in effect, limit US objectives to merely
guaranteeing the South Vietnamese the right to determine

‘ their own future on the one hand and offsetting the effect
of North Vietnam's application of force in South Vietnam
on the other. ‘The United States would remain committed
+o these two objectives only so long as the South Vietnamese

De TOP SECRET - Sensitive
