Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Qui Nhon. This in turn led naturally to the later National Priority Area
program, but had no other value.

With MACV reluctant to close down its Hop Tac Secretariat, with the
civilian Americans giving Hop Tac only verbal support, and with the
Vietnamese leaving a powerless staff at the headquarters, Hop Tac could
well have survived as an appendix to the normal chain of command, as so
many outdated structures survive in Vietnam because no one wants to admit
their irrelevance. But General Westmoreland saw a way to dispose of Hop
Tac cleanly and quietly in the summer of 1966, and he took it. At the
Mission Council meeting of July 7, 1966:

"General Westmoreland then turned to the subject of Hop
Tac. ‘He summarized the purpose of the Hop Tac concept, which
was implemented two years ago, and said that -- while it has
enjoyed only modest success over the past two years -- the
situation in the area surrounding Saigon/Cholon would be com-
paratively worse if we had not had the Hop Tac arrangement.
He noted that recent organizational changes have taken place,
which have resulted in the Capital Military Region becoming
the Capital Military District (as part of the III Corps Tac-
tical Zone) with Saigon remaining as an autonomous city. In
view of these changes, there is some question of the validity
of continuing with the original concept. More importantly,
III Corps has a Revolutionary Development Council and a Hop
Tac Council which results in some duplication of effort.
Consequently, the General believes that these two councils
should be merged, with the Revolutionary Development Council
absorbing the Hop Tac Council. General Westmoreland asked
the Mission Council to endorse this proposal for him to carry
out. After brief discussion, Ambassador Lodge indicated his

approval." 1h/

By this time Hop Tac had long lost the "highest priority" which was
supposed to justify it, and both the American and the Vietnamese had
turned to other matters.

But Hop Tac was not adequately analyzed before embarking on other
efforts, and its shortcomings were largely forgotten by the time that
the still-deteriorating situation in Gia Dinh led MACV to commit three
U.S. Army battalions to the inner area surrounding Saigon -- the original
first phase of Hop Tac -- as part of Operation Fairfax in November of
1966. The Mission, with no institutional memory, forgot -- or never
learned -- the lessons that Hop Tac could have offered.

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
