Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

in San Francisco in regérd to trusteéshiss. Throughout
a discussions | the American delegation has insisted
upon the necessity of providing for 4 progressive moasure
of self-government for all dependent peoples looking
toward their eventual independence or incovooration in
sone form of federation stcording to circwunstances end
the ability of the peoples to assume these responsibili-
ties. Such decisions would preclude the es tablishment

Of 2 tims teeshin in Indochine except wi tl is

th the consent of
the French Governnent. The letter sesme unlikely. Never=

theless it is tne President's intention eat sone anprooriate
time to ask thet the Mrench Government give some positive
indication of its intentions in regard to the establish-
ment of civil libertiss and increesing measures of selr-
govermiuent in Indochina before fomulating further decla-

rations of policy in this respec t.|

16d to the

in. the meantime the President has explains tt
French Forei.n Winister thet whereas we welcome French
participation in the war against Jepan the determination
of the extent that it would be practical and helpful to
have French forces join with us in such operations must
be left to the Commander in Chief, United Stetes Army
Forces, Pacific. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are at present

engagea in a study of the possibilities of }
along the lines oi the following sug. estions:

=

rench help

di. 4

(a) While avoiding so fer as practicable
unnecessary or long-term commitments with regard
to the smount or cheracter of any sssistance
which the United States may give to French resis-
tance forces in Indochine, this Government should
continue to efford such assistence as does not
interfere with the reaquirements of other planned
operations. Gwing to the nesd foi concentrating
all ovr resources in the Pacific on eI
alveady plennec, large-scele militery operetions

i.

~
}

aimed directly at the liberetion of Tae porns
cannot, however, be contemplated et this time.
Amevicen troops shovld not be used in Indochina
except in Americen military operstions against
the Japenese,

(ob) French offers of military and neval
assistance in the Pacific should be considered
on their military merits as beering on the
objective of Gefenting denen as in the cese of
