Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

served by reporting to us or to their superiors within the GVN what
we or the GVN high officials wanted to hear.) As December and
January and February passed, the situation reports trended consist-
ently downward, the accumulating evidence seemed to indicate quite
clearly that appreciation of setbacks and of adverse developments

was regularly belated. The result was that programs tended commonly
to be premised upon a more optimistic appraisal of the situation than
was valid for the time when they were adopted, whether or not they
were valid for an earlier period.

Judgments of the trend of events in Vietnam and of the progress
of our program had long been a subject of controversy, both public
and within the councils of government. That there had been an under-
current of pessimism concerning the situation in Vietnam was no
secret to the responsible officials who visited Vietnam in September
and who reported to the President on 2 October, or to the larger
group that convened at CINCPAC HQ on 20 November: Most of the quali-
fications in their minds related to imponderables of the political
situation, which it was always hoped and assumed would be successfully
resolved. The focus of the disagreement had generally been the
policies of Diem and Nhu especially with respect to the Buddhists.
During the summer of 1963, disagreement.over the state of affairs in
Vietnam had not only been aired in closed official councils, but had
flared into open controversy in the public press in a manner that
seemed to many to be detrimental to the U.S. It was possible to get
directly conflicting views from the experts. One of the better known
illustrations of this bewildering diversity of opinions among those
with some claim to know is the instance recounted by both Schlesinger
and Hilsman of the reports to President Kennedy on 10 September 1963
by General Victor Krulak and Mr. Joseph A. Mendenhall upon their return
from their special mission to Vietnam. General Krulak was a specialist
in counterinsurgency and Mr. Mendenhall had, not long before, completed
a tour of duty in Saigon as Deputy Chief of Mission under Ambassador
Durbrow. After hearing them both out (with Krulak painting the rosy
picture and Mendenhall the gloomy one), the President, in the words of
the Hilsman account, “looked quizzically from one to the other. You
two did visit the same country, didn't you?"14/

Much of the disagreement concerning the progress of the anti-Viet
Cong effort during the middle of 1963 was related intimately to issues
posed by the Buddhist revolt. Where there was pessimism or scepticism
about the progress of the war in general or the success of the pacifica-
tion program, the attitude was generally associated with the judgment
that Diem and Nhu were not administering affairs right and were alienating
rather than winning the support of the masses of South Vietnamese people.
Aside from Diem and Nhu and the Buddhist revolt, the major center of
controversy was the situation in the Delta. The fact that NSAM 273
called for priority effort in the Delta reflected official recognition
that the situation in the Delta demanded it. The ground work for this
was laid during the McNamara-Taylor visit, but recognition of the serious
problem there had come slowly and not without controversy.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
