Declassified per ExecUli\'e Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD D'-lie: 2011 
V,A Justification of the War (11 Vols,) 
Public Statements (2 Vols,) 
Volwne I: A- The Truman Administration 
8-- The Eisenhower Administration 
C-- The Kennedy Administration 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NNO Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
• 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D~te: 2011 
V. A. 
p. Vol I 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE WAR -
RJBLIC STATEl-1EJIt"TS 
A. Truman Administration 
B. Eisenhower Adninistration 
C. Kennedy Administration 
O~95 
.Ii 
!4 
I)eclassified pcr Excl:utive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
3 
, 
) 
\ 
PART V. 
Declassified per Execulive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11 
JUSTIFICAnON OF THE liAR -- RJBLIC S TATE~1E""TS 
Foreword 
This portion of the study consists of an examination of the 
public statements justifying U.S. involvement in Vietnam. 
Only 
official statements contained in either the U. S. Departrrcent of 
State BUlletins or the Public Papers of the Presidents were re-
vie\-.'ed. 
Although concl usions are based pr imarily on the state-
ments of the President , the Secretary of State and the Secretary 
of Defense, the statements of other high-ranking government 
officials were al so studied in ascertaining the policy context 
of t he quoted material. 
This report includes analyses of the 
Truman, Eisenhm.-er and Kennedy periods . 
The statements are 
organized chronologically ,d.thin each Ad:ninistration, end are 
summarized at t he head of each section. 
A. 
Tr uman Admini strati on 
B. 
Eisenhmrer Admini str ation 
C. 
Kennedy Administration 
o 
Declassified per Excl:utive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
I)eclassified pcr Excl:utive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
TRUMAN ADl.fINISTRATION 
SUJ·~·\ARY 
The statements enclosed are from the period 1950 - 1952: 
from 
the Secretary of State ' s announcement marking the beginning of the 
U. S. involvement in Vietnam to the NATO resolution supporting the 
French fight in Indochina. 
The justifications advanced for the U. S. 
commitment in Indochina include the follov~ng : 
a . 
The Soviets are engaged in a "monstrous conspiracy to 
stamp out freedom allover the ,~orld , II and Soviet imperialism, vith 
camaunist China as its instrument, poses a direct threat to the inde-
pendence of the Associated States of Indochina. 
b. 
The defense of Indochina is an integral part of the 
world",ide resistance by free nations to communist aggression and sub-
version . 
c . 
The raw materials and agricultural products of Southeast 
Asia are "vitally needed" by the free nations of the world. 
d . 
The United States, in the interest of preventing a third 
world war, has provided aid to the Associated States end }rance. 
A 
• 
y. A. 
I)eclassified pcr Excl:utive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1 
JUSTIFICATION OF THE ;TAR -- PUBLIC STATEI-1ENTS 
TRUMAl. ADfUNISTRATION 
CONTENTS 
1. Secretary of State marks the beginning of U.S. military and 
economic assistance to the Associated States and France 
(8 ~!ay 1950) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
A-2 
2. 
Truman cites Communist threat in Asia; emphasizes the lessons 
of history in meeting aggression i n its earl y stages 
(u April 1951) .. .. . • . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. A-2 
3. 
President cites Communist imperialism as a threat to vitally 
needed raw materials and manpot· .. er of free Asian nations as 
requiring U.S . assistance to these countries (24 14ay 1951) ...... A-3 
4. 
Statement by the Departments of State and Defense resulting 
from French-U. S. discussions regarding aid to Indochina 
(23 September 1951) .. . .. . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . .. • . . ... .. . . . . .. . . • . .•.. A- 5 
5. 
Communique acknowledging the primary role of U.S. in Korea 
and its secondary role of assisting French in Indochina in 
combatting Communist imperialism (18 June 1952 ) .. . .... . ..... .... A-5 
6. 
Resolution adopted by ~orth Atlantic Council of NATO support 
for French role in Indochina and its importance to Atlantic 
Community (17 December 1952)..... . ..... .. .. .. . .................. A-5 
A-I' 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 1011 
v. 
JUSTIFICATIOn OF THE HAR -- PtrBLIC 
A. 
Truman Administration 
Secretary of state Statement on Extension of Nilitary and Economic Aid , 
1,iay 8, 1950, Departnent of State Bulletin, May 22, 1950, p . 821: 
* * * 
"The United States Government , convinced that neither national inde -
pendence nor democratic evolution exist in any area dominated by Soviet 
im-oerialism, considers the situation to be such as to \~-arrant its accord-
ing econo~c aid and military e~uipment to the Associated States of 
Indochina and to France in order to assist them in restoring stability and 
permitting these states to pursue their peaceful and democratic development. " 
2 . 
President's Radio Report to the American People on Korea and on U. S. 
Policy in the Far East, April 11, 1951, Public Pa~ers of the Presidents, 
p_ 223 _ 
"I ,,!ant to tal.k to you plainly tonight about what we are doing in Korea 
and about our policy in the Far East . 
"In the simplest terms, what vie are doing in Korea is this: 
He are try-
ing to prevent a third \:orld war . 
* * * 
"The comnunists in the Kremlin are engaged in a monstrous conspiracy to 
staJIlP out freedom. all over the "rorld. If they were t o succeed, the United 
states ,,-ould be nUI!l.bered among their principal victims. It must be clear 
to everyone that t he United States cannot -- and will not - - sit idly by 
and a,,,ait foreign conquest . 
The only question is : 
Hhat is the best time 
to meet t he threat and ho ..... ' is the best way to meet it? 
"The best time to meet the threat is in the beginning. It is easier to 
put out a fire in the beginni ng when it i s small than after it has become 
a roaring blaze . 
And the best way to meet the threat of aggression is for 
the ueace-loving nations to act together . If they don't act together , they 
are iikely to be picked off, one by one . 
"If t hey had followed the right policies i n the 1930 ' s -- if the f'ree 
countries had acted together to crush the aggression of the dictators, and 
if they had ected in the beginning when the aggression was small -- there 
pr~babl:'l would have been no Horld War II . 
"If history has taught us ·anything, it is that aggress i on anyvrhere in 
the '.rorld is a threat to the peace everr,.,rhere in t he .,,"orld. 
When that 
ag&ression is supported by the cruel and selfish rulers of a pOvTerful 
nation whO are bent on conqueat, it becomes a clear and present danger to 
~he security and independffilce of every free nation . 
* 
-1(. * 
A-2 
• 
Declassified l:ler Executive Order 13526. Section ].3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"I have another secret intelligence report here . 
This one tells what 
another Communist officer in the Far East told his men several months 
before the invasion of Korea. 
Here is what be said : 
' In order to success-
fully undertake the long-awaited world resolution, we must first unify 
Asia .•. Java, Indochina, 1·1alaya; India, Tibet, Thailand, Fhilippines , and 
Japan are our ul~imate targets . •• . The United S~ates is the only obstacle 
on our road for the liberation of all the countries in southeast Ada. 
In 
other words, we must Unify the people of Asia and crush the United States.' 
* * * 
"The dangers are great. 
Make no mistake about it . 
Behind the North 
Koreans and Chinese Communists in the front lines stand additional millions 
of Chinese soldiers . 
And behind the Chinese stand the tanks, the planes , 
the submarines , the soldiers , and the scheming rulers of the Soviet Union. " 
3· 
* * * 
President Truman I s Special l·tessage to Congress on !·;utual Security 
Program, l.fay 24, 1951, Public Papers of the Presidents, p. 309 : 
* * * 
"In Asia, in a vast area. stretching from Afghanistan to Korea, free 
countries are struggling to meet communist aggression in all its many 
forms . 
Some of these countries are battling the communist armies of 
Soviet satellites; some are engaged in bitter civil strife against 
communist-led guerrillasj all of them face the immediate danger of com-
munist subversion . 
"Soviet intentions .n th regard to these countries are unmistakably 
clear. 
Using the ",'eapons of subversion, false propaganda and civil war, 
the Kremlin has already reduced China to the status of a satellite . 
The 
Soviet rulers have turned their satellite armies loose on the Republic of 
Korea. 
Communist rebellion is raging in L1"J.dochina. 
In BUl'me, the Philip-
pines, and other places , communist- inspired groups are stirring up internal 
disorder. 
In ell countries, they are trying to exploit deep-seated economic 
difficulties -- poverty, illiteracy end disease. 
"This campaign threatens to absorb the manpo .. rer and the vi tal resources 
of the East into the Soviet design of world conquest. It threatens to 
deprive the free nations of some of their most Vitally needed raw meterials . 
It threatens to tUrn more of the peaceful millions of the East into armies 
to be used as pa\fflS at the disposal of the Kremlin. 
liAs ide frOID iTl'.mediate considerations of security, the continued inde-
pendence of these nations is vital to the future of the free 'world, 
Many 
of these nations are new to self government . 
They have dedicated them-
selves to the ideals of national independence, of hunan l iberty, and social 
progress . 
Their hundreds of millions of citizens are eager for justice 
and liberty and a st~\e in the future • 
A-3 
9 
I)eclassified pcr Excl:utive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
"These countries demonstrate the pOi,'er and vitality of the ideals of 
our o~m American Revolution; they mark the sweeping advance across the 
world of the concepts of freedom and brotherhood . 
To lose these coun-
tries to the rulers of the Kremlin ~JOuld be more than a blow to our mili-
tary security and our economic life . It would be a terrible defeat for 
the ideals of freedom - - with grave spiritual consequences for men 
every",here '>'ho share opr faith in freedom . 
nAll these considerations make it essential for the United states to 
help the free countries of Asia in their struggle to make good t heir 
independence and bring economic and social progress to their people . 
Where the governments of these countries are striving to establish free 
and stable political institutions , to build up their military defenses, 
and to raise the standard of living above the level of bare subsistence , 
we can and should give them assistance . 
He cannot replace their own 
strong efforts , but we can supplement them. 
"This 1·1utual Security Program is intended to do that . 
On the military 
side, it will supply certain of the Asian countries with items of military 
equipment and the training they need for their defense forces . 
On the 
economic side, it will provide a number of the Asian countries with the 
most urgently needed connnodities, machinery, and tools , and vrith technical 
advice in such fields as agriculture , industry, health, and goverpJnental 
administration. 
liThe assistance I am recommending for Asian countries, 555 million 
dollars in military aid and 375 million dollars in economic aid, is so 
planned as to meet the most pressing needs in the various countries, and 
is intended to prov~de the crucial margin of resources which will enable 
t hem to move forward . 
"N.ilitary assistance under this program will go to the Chinese annies 
on Formosa, to belp keep that island out of the hands of Communist China. 
It will go to Indo-China, where over 100, 000 French toops are fighting 
side-by-side uith the forces of Viet Nam, Laos , and Cambodia against 
communist-led forces . It will go to the Philippines and to Thailand, to 
help build forces strong enough to insure internal security and discourage 
outside attack. 
Some of these military assistance funds will also be 
available for allocation to other countries in the area if a critical need 
arises . 
liThe military aid under this program will supplement other military 
efforts against communism in Asia. 
The countries ~e will be aiding, and 
a number of others , are supporting military forces with their Olm funds . 
France is supplying the largest part of the military supplies ne.eded in 
Indo-China, and Britain is supplying her forces ",hich are fighting guerrillas 
in the J.1alay States . 
The substantial military aid ..... 'e are giving to the 
forces of t~e Republic of Korea is included in the budget'for our military 
services . 
A-4 
10 
Declassified per Executive Order 13526. Seclion 3.3 
NND Projeci Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Dale: 2011 
liThe struggle for security and peace in Asia is far more than a mili-
tary matter. In many of the Asian countries , including all the countries 
which need nilitary aid, economic assistance is also required. 
* * * 
4. 
The Nilitary Aid Pro ram: 
Statement by the Denartments of State and 
Defense, Septemb&r 23, 1951, Departnent of State Bulletin, October 
1951, p . 570: 
* * * 
"The participants were in complete agreement that the successful 
defense of Indochina is of great importance to the defense of all South-
east Asia ..•. II 
* * * 
5. 
The Defense of Indochina: Co~unique Regarding Discussions Between 
Representatives of the United States J France, Viet-Nam, and Cambodia, 
June 18, 1952, Department of state Bulletin, June 30, 1952, p. 1010: 
"The principle which governed this frank and detailed exchange of 
views and information was the common recognition that the struggle in 
which the f'orces of the French Union and the Associated States are en-
gaged against the forces of communist aggression in Indochina is an inte-
gral part of the world-wide resistance by the Free Nations to Communist 
attempts at conquest and subversion •.•• " 
* •• 
6. SUE-nert by NATO of the French Union Defense Eff'orts in Indochina: 
Resolution Adopted by tbe North Atlantic Council, December 17 , 1952, 
Department of State Bulletin, January 5, 1953, p . 4: 
"The Nortb Atlantic Council 
"Recognizes that resistance to direct or indirect aggression in any 
part of the world is an essential contribution to the cammon security of 
the free world; 
"HAVING BEEl'1 INFORNED at its meeting in Paris on the 16th December 
of the latest developments in the military and politi cal situation in 
I ndo-China; 
"Expresses itr; wholehearted admiration for the valiant and long con-
tinued struggle by the French forces and the armies of the Associated 
St~tes against Communist aggression; and 
"Acknowledges tbat the resistance of the free nations in South East 
Asia as in Korea is in fullest hannony with the aims "and ideals of the 
Atlantic Con::munity; 
A-5 
I 
I 
II 
I)eclassified pcr Excl:utive Order 13526. Section 3.3 
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011 
nAnd therefore agrees that the campaign waged by the French Union 
forces in Indo-China deserves continuing support from the NATO govern-
ments.
1I 
A-6 
