Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recommendations were that we should increase our AID to GVN and that
Chieu Hoi Program should be improved. However, in another memorandum
to the President on July 20, following a trip to Saigon, McNamara
suggested that the U.S. Government should lay down some terms for its
assistance. GVl, was again pressing for more U.S, forces than were
available. He mentioned rice policy, plus a “veto on major GVN com-
manders, statements about invading NVH, and so." 10

McNaemara's overall evaluation was deeply pessimistic, making clear
why he recommended increased U.S. forces at that time;

Estimate of the Situation. The situation in South Vietnem
is worse then a year ago (when it was worse than a year before
that). After a few months of stalemate, the tempo of the war
hes quickened. A hard VC push is now on to dismember the nation
and to maul the army. The VC main and local forces, reinforced
by militia and guerrillas, have the initiative and, with large
attacks (some in regimental strength), are hurting ARVIN) forces
bedly. The main VC efforts have been in southern I Corps,
northern and central IT Corps and north of Saigon. The central
highlands could well be lost to the National Liberation Front
during this monsoon season. Since June 1, the GV has been
forced to abandon six district capitals; only one has been
retaken. U.S, combat troops deployments and US/VNAF strikes
against the North have put to rest most South Vietnamese fears
that the United States will forsake them, and US/VNAF air
strikes in-country have probably shaken VC morale somewhat.

Yet the government is able to provide security to fewer and

fewer people in less and less territory as terrorism increases.

Cities and towns are being isolated as fewer and fewer roads

and railroads are usable and power and communications lines are
. Cub:

The economy is deteriorating -- the war is disrupting rubber
production, rice distribution, Delat vegetable production and
the coastal fishing industry, causing the loss of jobs and
income, displacement of people and frequent breakdown or sus-
pension of vital means of transportation and communication;
foreign exchange earnings have fallen; and severe inflation is
threatened. 11/

In Saigon Ambassador Taylor gave the GY" the first definite sign of
U.S. concern about the effects of U.S. deployments on Saigon port opera-
tions and on the Vietnamese economy. In a lester to Prime Minister Ky
dated July 1, 1965, he said: ,

Your experts and ours are in constant contact on /the
budgetary deficit/ and have always worked effectively
together.../They/ will need your support in carrying out
the anti-inflation measures which they may recommend from

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
