Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

moreover, carry with it the threat of subsecuent air and naval attacks
against North Vietnam. And," he continued, "threat may be as important
as execution...in producing desired Communist reactions." 78/

Althougi initially advocated as a valuable bargaining piece
for all the options, the concept of deploying ground forces for this
purpose became associated with Options A or C. In the former case, it
was urged with recognition that "A" offered little leverage for bargain-
ing other than hoped for improvement in the GVN's internal administration
and pacification efforts. For "CG" it was perceived much in the sense in
which it was originally proposed -- serving as an additional negotiating
ploy before it might be needed as en operstionel military capacity. Such
a force was seen as taking either of two forms: (1) a U.S. combet force,
probably of division strength, or (2) a force composed of contingents
from certain SEATO members (Australia, New Zealand, the UK, Thailand and
the Philippines). Interesting, in view of subsequent events, is the fact
that participation by South Korea and the Republic of China specifically
was not to be sought. (This may also have been significant of the Ad-
ministration's tendency at the time to view Communist China as co-insti-
getor of the Vietnamese aggression.) The contemplated ground force
deployment also was seen as serving some auxillary functions: (1) to
deter DRV ground force deployments into South Vietnam; (2) by taking
blocking positions, to reduce the infiltration into the South through
Laos; and (3) (in the case of the multi-national force) to improve the
international picture of our actions in South Vietnam by virtue of
visible international participation. 79/

As stated previously, the primary bargaining element in Option B
was the application of clearly ascending military strikes ageinst North
Vietnam. These would be halted only in return for demonstrated DRV com-
pliance with demands that it stop supporting and directing military
operations in South Vietnam and Laos. It was pointed out that DRV
compliance under pressure would be tantamount to surrender. Further,
if we insisted that compliance include calling off all acts of VC
terrorism and of resistance to pacification efforts in South Vietnam,
it would mean "virtual meonditional surrender." 80/ To obtain such
high stekes, the group recognized that intensive pressures would be re-
quired. However, it also recognized that the combination of extreme
demands and harsh actions would be most likely to produce adverse inter-
national reaction end increased pressures for an early cease-fire and
negotiations.

The basic political objective perceived for Option B was to
"prevent internetionel consideration...from interfering with our continu-
ing pressures against the DRV until the DRV has taken the actions we
desire of it." In view of the expected demands for an early cease-fire,
it was believed advisable to present the U.S. case in the United Nations
at the time "B" military operations were initiated. This, it was felt,
would channel some of the international pressures into a controlled

-25 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
