Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

h. Army Questions Feasibility of Air-Naval Intervention and
Outlines Ground Forces Requirements

The principal result of the discussions on the NSC 177
Special Annex was to bring into the open the issue of the costs in manpower
and materiel of a U.S. involvement. The Army was critical of contingency
planning that was based on the assumption that U.S. air and naval forces
could be used in Indochina without the commitment of ground combat forces.
General Matthew B. Ridgway, Army Chief of Staff, later wrote in his
Memoirs that he was quite disturbed at talk in high government circles
about employing air-naval power alone in Indochina. An Army position
paper submitted to the NSC in the first week of April, 1954, argued as
follows:

"). U.S. intervention with combat forces in Indochina is
not militarily desirable...

"2. A victory in Indochina cannot be assured by U.S. inter-
vention with air and naval forces alone.

"3, The use of atomic weapons in Indochina would not
reduce the number of ground forces required to achieve a
victory in Indochina.

"h, Seven U.S. divisions or their equivalent, with
appropriate naval and air support, would be required to win
a victory in Indochina if the French withdraw and the Chinese
Communists do not intervene. However, U.S. intervention
plans cannot be based on the assumption that the Chinese
Communists will not intervene.

"5. The equivalent of 12 U.S. divisions would be
required to win a victory in Indochina, if the French with-
draw and the Chinese Communists intervene.

"6. The equiyalent of 7 U.S. divisions would be required
to win a victory in Indochina if the French remain and the
Chinese Communists intervene. :

"7, Requirements for air and naval support for ground
force operations are: :

a. Five hundred fighter-bomber sorties per day
exclusive of interdiction and counter-air operations.

b. An airlift capability of a one division drop.

ce. A division amphibious lift.

B-10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
