Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

getting nowhere and the alternative approach might do better. Mainly,
however, the changed policy, and the somewhat enlarged aid program that
accompanied it, reflected the pressures created by the situation in
neighboring Laos. (We will see that there is a strong case to be made
that even the Fall, post-Taylor Mission, decisions were essentially
dominated by the impact of Laos. But in May the situation was unambiguous.
Laos, not anything happening in Vietnam, was the driving force.

A preliminary step came April 20. Immediately following the Bay of
Pigs disaster, and with the prospect of a disaster in Laos on the very
near horizon, Kennedy asked Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric to work
up a program for saving Vietnam. The program was delivered, as requested,
a week later. It was a somewhat enlarged version of the CIP, with the
implication, not spelled out in the paper, that the new effort would be
put into effect without making any demands on Diem. (Simultaneously,
Ambassador Durbow, who had been in Vietnam for four years, was being
replaced by Nolting, and this added to the hope that a new start might
be made with Diem.) There is nothing to suggest that anything more was
expected of Gilpatric's program, and indeed all the evidence suggests that
the main point of the exercise was to work General Lansdale into the role
of government-wide coordinator and manager of the country's first major test
in the new art of counter-insurgency. Lansdale served as Executive Officer
of the Task Force which Gilpatric organized and which he proposed should be
given a continuing, dominant role in managing the Vietnamese enterprise.

By the time the report was submitted on April 27 when the Laos crisis
was reaching its peak, a new Geneva conference had been agreed upon. But
there were serious doubts that the pro-western side in Laos would be left
with anything to negotiate about by the time the conference opened. Even
the U.S.-favored settlement (a coalition government ) represented a major,
if prudent, retreat from the previous U.S. position taken during the closing
months of the Eisenhower Administration.) So the situation in Laos was
bad, if unavoidable; and it followed right on the heels of the Bay of Pigs,
and at a time when the Soviets were threatening to move against Berlin.

The emphasis of the Gilpatric Task Force shifted from shaping up the counter-
insurgency aid program for Vietnam, to finding ways to demonstrate to the
South Vietnamese (and others) that a further retreat in Laos would not
foreshadow an imminent retreat in Vietnam.

On April 28, an annex to the Task Force report proposed to counter
the impact of Laos with U.S. support for an increase in South Vietnamese
forces (the original report had proposed only more generous financial support
for forces already planned under the CIP) and, further, a modest commitment
of U.S. ground combat units in South Vietnam, with the nominal mission of
establishing two training centers. On April 29, Kennedy endorsed the pro-
posals of the original draft, but took no action on the far more significant
proposals in the annex. On May 1, a revised Task Force draft came out,
incorporating the Laos Annex proposals, and adding a recommendation that
the U.S. make clear an intent to intervene in Vietnam to the extent needed
to prevent a Viet Cong victory. At this point, practical control of the

“ay TOP SECRET - Sensitive
