Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Habib was reportedly as frank with the President as he had ~
been with the advisory group. The President asked tough questions.
‘Habib stuck to his guns,' one source reported.

Whatever impact this group's recommendations and the direct briefings
he received had on the President was not immediately apparent in any
decision which affected the deployment of forces. Even as the President
announced, on 22 March, that General William C. Westmoreland would be
recalled from Vietnam to become the Army Chief of Staff, 93/ the Defense
Department continued to plan for the deployment of 43,500 additional
troops. In a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense on 23 March 1968,
the Assistant Secretary (Systems Analysis) forwarded his Program #6
Summary Table based on 579,000 men in South Vietnam, 54,000 over the
approved Program #5 ceiling. This 54,000 was made up of the 10,500
emergency reinforcement package, the 13,500 support forces for it, and
the 30,000 additional package. The Assistant Secretary added, that upon
notification of approval and desire to announce the new plan, the tables
would be published. 9h/

However, these particular tables were not to be published. The
President sought further advice as he wrestled with the problem which
had plagued his Administration. On March 26, General Creighton Abrams,
Deputy COMUSMACV, arrived suddenly and without prior announcement, and
was closeted with the President and his senior officials. These
conferences were conducted in the utmost secrecy amid press speculation
that Abrams would be named to succeed General Westmoreland. Further
press speculation was that the conferences dealt primarily with
expansion and modernization of the South Vietnamese armed forces and
that this tended to buttress earlier predictions that any increase in
American forces in South Vietnam would be modest. 95/

8. The President Decides

Apparently the Presidential decision on deployment of additional
U.§. forces to Vietnam was made on 28 March and concurred in by General
Abrams. In an undated memorandum (probably written on 27 or 28 March)
for the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, the Deputy Chief of Staff for
Military Operations, Lt General Lemley, indicated that the Joint Staff

‘had informed him of: 5

...-ventative decisions arising from the recent conference
between the’ President, the Chairman, and General Abrams, as
well as telecons between the Chairman and General Westmoreland.
It is believed that a Presidential decision may be made by

Friday (29 March) morning.

76 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
