Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Several of the states at Manila were acutely disappointed
at the reluctance of the U.S. to place its military forces at the disposal
of the pact; they were expecting a NATO-like commitment and they were sur-
prised when it was not forthcoming. Admiral Davis reported that:

"With respect to the military aspects of the Treaty, most
of the participating States, notably the Philippines and Thailand,
urged provisions that would explicitly commit the Treaty Parties
to take military action in event of aggression in the Treaty area.
The commitment of the United States to such action, of course,
was the purpose of these urgings. Much was said about the de-
sirability of the NATO as opposed to the allegedly weaker ANZUS
formula. Most of the participating States argued that explicit
commitments to take action were necessary if the Treaty was to
have the desired deterrent effect on the communists." 27/

But the U.S. delegates maintained their opposition, arguing that the U.S.
had to retain its freedom of action, and could not accept a treaty commit-
ment that was inconsistent with Constitutional requirements, and therefore
prejudicial to ratification of the treaty by the Senate.

(2) Anti-Commuinismn

At the beginning of the Manila Conference, the U.S. served
notice that it looked on the future SEATO agreement as an anti-communist
pact, and that it would react only against @ communist threat. The U.S.
agreed to "consult" with the other members to decide future action, if
faced with a non-communist threat. This, of course, had the effect of
emphasizing once again the qualified nature of the U.S, commitment: the
strongest power in the pact reserved the right to opt out of contingencies.
Other nations present at Manila saw many other threats to regional peace,
some of which seemed.to them a good deal more dangerous than communism
(e.g. Indonesian relations with Malaya, and Indian relations with Pakistan).
There was, as a result, some hesitance to leok on the pact as a mutual band-
ing together against all dangers. Few missed the irony of the U.S. being
the chief advocate of the SEATO pact, and also its prime qualifier. 28/

2. The Treaties Compared.

Although Secretary of State Dulles wished to avoid comparisons
of SEATO with NATO, such were inevitable. Similarities were in fact intended
by many of the Manila Conferees, and emerged in the wording of the treaties.
All the delegations at Manila, the U.S. included, took pains with treaty
terminology, calculating carefully the effect it would have on their own
domestic politics, as well as on the communist countries. As Admiral Davis
reported:

"The Treaty is a document that speaks to many audiences;
it supports self-determination of peoples, self-government and
independence in deference to Asian nationalism; it provides for
economic and technical cooperation as an inducement to present

A-15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
