Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
said he wanted pressure on the North, meaning a bombing campaign. Taylor
a replied with the position that State had authorized on joint planning.
| Khanh acted pleased and surprised, promised to think it over, and promised
to hold it tightly. He also said he wanted to reorganize GVN to strengthen
his own position; Taylor asked for specifics, and urged him not to do

|

anything drastic that would stir up trouble. 11/

:

) 2. The Tonkin Incidents and the Policy Prognoses, Aucust, 1

Within a week, North Vietnamese PI’ boats attacked the U.S. destroyer

) Maddox, in admitted retaliation for an attack by South Vietnamese boats
on two North Vietnamese islands. Then a disputed further attack of North
Vietnamese Pf boats on the Maddox and the Turner Joy on August 4 provoked
a U.S. retaliatory raid on the main North Vietnamese PI boat base and its
support facilities. The raids lifted GVN's spirits, as expected, and
encouraged Khanh to clamp down internally. On August 7, he proclaimed
a state of emergency, the idea he had been discussing for some time with
both Lodge and Taylor. He reimposed censorship and restricted movement;
but he left politicians and potential coup-plotters alone. 12/ Also on ~
August 7, the U.S. Congress in joint session passed the Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution.

On August 8, Westmoreland discussed overall joint planning with
Khanh; the question OF combined command came up, and Westmoreland IER ORES
the example of Korea. Both agreed to postpone this issue. 13/

| On August 1, State directed Saigon to avoid actions that could
be called provocative, like the DESOTO patrols (which the Maddox and the
Turner Joy had been doing when chtachedy sua 34A operations. State noted
that the U.S. retaliatory raid's effect on GVN's morale would be temporary,
and took a pessimistic view of the USOM reports:

"Mission's montly report (Saigon 377) expresses hope
of significant gains by end of year. But also says Khanh's
chances of staying in power are only 50-50, that leadership...
has symptoms defeatism and hates prospect of slugging it
out within country, that there will. be mounting pressures
for wider action ‘which, if resisted, will create frictions
and irritations which could lead local politicians to serious
consideration negotiated solution or local soldiers to mili-
tary adventure without U.S. consent'...Our actions of last
week lifted...morale temporarily, but also aroused expecta-
tions, and morale could easily sag back again if VC have
successes and we do nothing further.”

The cable went on to state that an essential element of U.S. policy was,

to devise the best possible means of action -- minimum risks for maximum
results in terms of SVN morale and pressure on DRV. In the context of

a possible new Geneva conference on Iaos, its prognosis was that pressure
on the North would be the main vehicle for success:

_

3h Cs TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
