Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

167
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Despite the application of the brake on ROLLING THUNDER
operations, the debate over escalation wore on. Further proposals were
made and further studies and reviews were requested. DIA was asked
+o conduct a special analysis of the NVN POL system. The study said
that the exceptionally high ratio of storage capacity to consumption
allowed the system to "absorb a high degree of degradation,” and noted
that the dispersed sites in the system were "relatively invulnerable,"
but concluded nonetheless that (a) the loss of storage at Haiphong would
be “critical to the entire bulk distribution system" and would require
either a "modification" in the handling of marine imports or a switch
to importation by rail or truck through China, and (b) the loss of the
other facilities would produce local POL shortages and transportation
bottlenecks until substitutes and alternatives could be devised. 4i/

2. The February Debate

In February a SNIE was published, estimating how NVN's
physical capabilities (not its will) to support the war in the South
would be affected by increasing the scope and intensity of ROLLING
THUNDER. The enlarged program which the estimate considered included
attacks to destroy all known POL facilities, destroy all large military
facilities except airfields and SAM sites (unless they seriously inter-
fered with our operations), interdict the land LOCs from China, (a) with
or (b) without closing the ports, put and keep electric power plants out
of action, and restrict the use of LOCs throughout NVN but especially
south of Hanoi. 42/

The SNIE concluded that although the increased bombing
might set a limit somewhere on the expansion of NVA/VC forces and their
operations in SVN, it would not prevent their support at substantially
higher levels than in 1965. The destruction of electric power facilities
would practically "paralyze" NVN's industry, but

..-because so little of what is sent south is pro-
duced in the DRV, an industrial shutdown would not very
seriously reduce the regime's capability to support the
‘insurgency. 43

Destruction of POL storage facilities would force NVN to almost complete
dependence on current imports, but NVN could manage. Destruction of
military facilities would mean the loss of some stockpiled munitions,
"although most such storage is now well dispersed and concealed." Closing
the ports and interdicting the LOCs from China would reduce the level of
imports--leaving the ports open would not--but NVN could continue to

pring in enough supplies that were critical to the survival of the regime
and essential military tasks, including the "small quantities" necessary
for transshipment to SVN.

76 j TOP SECRET - Sensitive
