Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This decision seemed sound to me at the time and continues to
appear so. I recommend that this deployment be held up until
we can sort out all matters relating to it."

Whatever was motivating those in Washington who had decided to make this
deployment, the Ambassador held the trump card as he had to clear the
move with the GVN before the troops could come in. The Prime Minister
had not been told at this juncture about the proposed landing of more
U.S. troops, and Taylor informed his superiors on 17 April that he did
not intend to tell Quat without clearer guidance explaining Washington's
intentions. 60/

That Washington was determined, with the President's sanction, to
go beyond what had been agreed to and formalized in NSAM 328 was manifested
unmistakably in a cable sent under joint Defense/State auspices by Mr.
McNaughton to the Ambassador on 15 April. 61/ That message, which will
be treated in detail in a later section, contained the following preamble:
"Highest authority believes the situation in South Vietnam has been de-
teriorating and that, in addition to actions against the North, something
new must be added in the South to achieve victory. As steps to that end,
we believe the following actions should be undertaken..." The message
goes on to list seven specific actions including the deployment of "a
brigade force” to Bien Hoa/Vung Tau "to act as a security force for our
installations and also to participate in counterinsurgency combat opera-
tions" according to plans to be prepared by General Westmoreland.

The documents do not reveal just exactly when Presidential
sanction was obtained for the expanded scope of the above proposals. It
is possible that the Ambassador may have caught the Defense Department
and the JCS in a little cart-before-the-horsemanship. The day following
the order from the JCS to deploy the 173rd and the Ambassador's reclama
thereto, the JCS submitted a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense in
which they addressed the Ambassador's objection to the deployment and
offered their own position, which was that "the U.S. had need of the
173rd in Bien Hoa/Vung Tau to insure the security of air operations and
logistics bases as had been recommended by COMUSMACV and by CINCPAC in
CINCPAC to JCS DIG 132235Z April 1965." The 173rd was also needed, they
said, for subsequent phasing into counterinsurgency operations. 62/
Whether or not the JCS wrote that memorandum with red faces, the Secretary
of Defense dates approval for final deployment of the 173rd as of the 30th
of April, which is considerably later. 63/ Even when the 173rd was
finally ordered to deploy, it went on a temporary duty basis. It remained
in that anamolous status well into the summer of 1965, expecting any day
to be recalled to Okinawa and replaced by another unit. The troops con-
tinued to draw TDY pay, and their dependents remained at the permanent
base on Okinawa instead of returning to the U.S. 64/

With the 173rd successfully held in abeyance, the principals took
that issue, along with the seven points of the 15 April cable, to Honolulu,
where a conference convened on 20 April and structured the outlines of the
ever popular enclave strategy. ,

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
