Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

With respect to interdiction of men and materiel,
it now appears that no combination of actions against
the North short of destruction of the regime or occupa-
tion of North Vietnamese territory will physically reduce
the flow of men and materiel below the relatively small
amount needed by enemy forces to continue the war in the
South. Our effort can and does have severe disruptive
effects, which Hanoi can and does compensate for by the
reallocation of manpower and other resources; and our effort
ean and does have sporadic retarding effects, which Hanoi
ean and does plan on and pre-stock against. Our efforts
physically to cut the flow meaningfully by actions in North
Vietnam therefore largely fail and, in failing, transmute
attempted interdiction into pain, or pressure on the North
(the factor discussed in the paragraph next above). The
lowest "ceiling on infiltration can probably be achieved
by concentration on the North Vietnamese "funnel" south of
20° and on the Trail in Laos.

But what if the above analyses are wrong? Why not
escalate the bombing and mine the harbors (and perhaps
occupy southern North Vietnam) -- on the gamble that it
would constrict the flow, meaningfully limiting enemy
action in the South, and that it would bend Hanoi? The
answer is that the costs and risks of the actions must be
considered.

The primary costs of course are US lives: The air
campaign against heavily defended areas costs us one pilot
in every 40 sorties. In addition, an important but hard-
to-measure cost is domestic and world opinion: There may
be a limit beyond which many Americans and much of the world
will not permit the United States to go. The picture of the
world's greatest superpower killing or seriously injuring
1000 non-combatants a week, while trying to pound a tiny
backward nation into submission on an issue whose merits
‘are hotly disputed, is not a pretty one. It could con-
ceivably produce a costly distortion in the American national
consciousness and in the world image of the United States --
especially if the danase to North Vietnam is complete
enough to be "successful."

The most important risk, however, is the likely Soviet,
Chinese and North Vietnamese reaction to intensified US
air attacks, harbor-mining, and ground actions against North
Vietnam.

156 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
