Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

recommendations were not subjected to any searching debate when they
were discussed with the President on April 2, since the wording of the
President's decision in the NSAM issued on April 6, 110/ is verbatim
identical with the wording of the McGeorge Bundy recommendation that
was circulated to the Principals before the meeting:

Subject to continuing review, the President epproved the
following general framework of continuing action against North
Vietnam and Laos;

We should continue roughly the present slowly ascending
tempo of ROLLING THUNDER operations, being prepared to add
strikes in response to a higher rate of VC operations, or
conceivably to slow the pace in the unlikely event VC slaked
off sharply for what appeared to be more than a temporary
operational lull. ;

The target systems should continue to avoid the effective
GCI range of MiGs. We should continue to vary the types of
targets, stepping up attacks on lines of communication in the
near future, and possibly moving in a few weeks to attacks on
the rail lines north and northeast of Hanoi.

Leaflet operations should be expended to obtain maximum
practicable psychological effect on the North Vietnamese popu-
lation. ks

Blockade or aerial mining of North Vietnamese ports needs
further study and should be considered for future operetions.
It would have major political complications, especially in
relation to the Soviets and other third countries, but also
offers many advantages.

; Air operation in Laos, particularly route blocking opera-
tions in the Panhandle area, should be stepped up to the maxi-
mum remunerative rate.

BE. The Director of Central Intelligence Demurs

As has been indicated, the dramatic element in the President's
decisions of April 2 was not in the sphere of air strikes against the
North, but in the area of the mission of US ground forces in South
Vietnam. NSAM 328 promulgated the significant decision to change the
role of the Marine battalions deployed to Vietnam from one of advice
and static defense to one of active combat operations against the VC
guerrillas. The fact that this departure from a long-held policy had
momentous implications was well recognized by the Administration leader-
ship: The President himself was greatly concerned that the step be
given as little prominence as possible. In NSAM 328 his wishes in this
regard were stated as follows:

90. TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
