Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

which can so easily become a quagmire from which there is no
escape and concentrate instead on encouraging the GVN/RVNAF
to take the initiative in a situation they know best how to
tackle in specific tactical terms. 29/

Meanwhile, efforts went forward to convert half of ARVN to the primary
mission of supporting Revolutionary Development. On October 5, the Chief
of the Central Training Agency, Major General Vy, chaired the high level
joint conference which assigned administrative tasks and developed a
schedule of required actions. Subsequently, a joint MACV/JGS team
visited a few ARVN division headquarters and found that personnel had

not understood the July JGS directives and thus had not undertaken the
actions directed. 30/

At about the same time, Revolutionary Development Minister Thang
entered one of his recurring periods of pouting because he considered
recent American criticism of slowess to imply their evaluation of the
program as a failure. He told Ky he was ready to resign if Americans
were so critical that they wanted to take it over and run it. Lansdale
was able to placate Thang, but ARVN reluctance continued. 31/

The conversion to RD was fraught with criticism on both sides, for
the American press continued to suggest that the ARVN shift to pacifica-
tion meant Americans would bear the brunt of the fighting and take the
bulk of the casualties. 32/ State considered this line tendentious and
urged Lodge and MACV to use "all leverage provided through MAP and
advisor program" to shift ARVN to RD. 33/

7. Military Advisory Matters at Year's End, 1966

COMUSMACV backed out of ARVN personnel selection by serving notice
in a message to Corps Senior Advisors that only policy matters, not the
detailed problems of failure to perform, were to be referred to him.

In reviewing the deficiencies discussed in the Senior
Advisor's Monthly Reports, it is noted that many items
are correctable in command channels at unit, division,
or corps level; yet it is not apparent that such action
is being taken aggressively at local and intermediate
command levels. Deficiencies involving policy ere
referable appropriately to this headquarters; deficien-
cies involving non-compliance with directives, apathy
on the part of a command, etc., are to be resolved in
RVNAF channels.

The role of the advisor is difficult and often frustrat-
ing. It requires military acumen, dedication, selfless-
ness, and perserverance. It is desired that addressees
channel the professional abilities of the advisory

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
