Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(107

"Faced with this deteriorating situation, President Diem in Decen-
per of 1961 sent e letter to President Kennedy in which he outlined the
nature of the attack on his government and asked for increased American
assistance. The United States considered this request very carefully.
Vice President Johnson had visited Viet-Nem in May of 1961, and President
Kennedy had sent General [Maxwell D./ Taylor to Viet-Nam again in the
fall of that year. Soa we were very clear about the nature of the threat.

"We knew that the Viet Cong attack was caused, led, and directed by «
the Communist authorities in North Viet-Nam. This was a case of Communist
aggression, although the Communists made great efforts to conceal the
fact, aggression against a friendly people with whom the United States
had strong ties. There could be little question about our decision. We
promptly egreed to step up our military and economic assistance.

"When we increased our assistance to Viet-Nam we issued a study of
the evidence of Communist infiltration into South Viet-Nam and Communist
direction of the war against the Government of South Viet-Nam. This was
necessary, not just out of a ‘decent respect for the opinions of mankind,’
but because of the great and continuing Communist effort to portray the
Viet Cong as an indigenous and legitimate popular movement against a re-
pressive government. I think it is worth noting in this connection that
the international body specifically established in 1954 at the Geneva
conference to oversee and keep the peace in Viet-Nam -- the International
Control Commission, composed of India, Canada, and Poland -- has confirmed
the fact that Communist North Viet-Nem is engaged in an attempt to overthrow

‘py violence the Government of South Viet-Nem. After sifting the evidence
for almost a year, the International Control Commission in June of 1962
issued a special report which makes it clear that the Viet Cong are the
instruments of Hanoi's deliberate attack on South Viet-Nam.

"If we were losing the war in the fall of 1961 and early 1962, where
are we today? I think it is fair to say that the tide has now turned and
that the Government of Viet-Nam is with our help slowly overcoming the
Communist guerrillas. No more provincial capitals have been taken, the
Communists have not 'liberated' any part of South Viet-Nam, and Saigon
is once again exporting rice. In fact we anticipate that Saigon will
export 300,000 tons of rice this year.

— s+ -*

"The 'Why' of Our Involvement .

. "T have described the American role in the Vietnamese war -- the
‘how’ of our involvement. I would like to close by indicating something
of the 'why.'

"you can think of Viet-Nam as a piece of strategic real estate. It
is on the corner of mainland Asia, across the east-west trade routes, and
in a position that would make it an excellent base for further Communist
aggression against.the rest of free Asia.

C-39
