Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and Peking. Chinese political and ideological aggressiveness was viewed
as a threat to the ability of these peoples to determine their own
futures, end hence to develop along ways compatible with U.S. interests.
The U.S. commitment to defeat North Vietnamese aggression, even at the
risk of "direct military confrontation" with Communist China, was per-
ceived as part of the longer-term policy of establishing conditions

which permit the independent nations of the region to develop the ability
and confidence "to cope with the emerging and expanding power of China. "k7/
These comments may have influenced that part of the 8 November version
which referred to current U.S. objectives as part of the broader policy
of "resisting the expansion of Communist China and its allies...."

The JCS member also stressed the importance of not falling back
from current policy aims. He stated that "in the eyes of the world" the
United States was committed to its initial objectives "as matters of
national prestige, credibility, and honor." Further, that U.S retention
of "a measure of free-yorld leadership" required "successful defense" in
South Vietnam against the wars of national liberation strategy. Admiral
Mustin criticized the Bundy draft for overstating "the degree of diffi-
culty associated with success for our objectives in SVN." He asserted:

"Our first objective is to cause the DRV to terminate
support of the SEA insurgencies....To achieve this objective
does not necessarily require that we 'defeat North Viet-Nam,'
and it almost certainly does not require that we defeat
Communist China. Hence our commitment to SVN does not involve
@ high probability, let alone 'high risks,' of a major conflict
in Southeast Asia."

He characterized the draft's expression of concern over risks and costs
as an inference "as though the harder we try the more we stand to risk
and to lose. On the contrary, he stated, the "best hope for minimizing
risks, costs, and losses in achieving our objectives" could be attained
though "a resolute course of action.” 18/

Admiral Mustin also attacked the implication that there was
"some alternative to our holding South Viet-Nem. There is none,” he
stated, adding: “We have no further fall-back position in Southeast Asia
in the stated view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff." Specifically, he warned
that to attempt to strengthen other areas of Asia, "in the context of our
having been pushed out of SVN, would be a thoroughly non-productive effort
militarily...." Moreover, characterizing the draft's concessions to the
unique difficulties in Laos and South Vietnam as “sour grapes," he
attacked its assumptions that we could convince other nations that
failure in South Vietnem was due to strictly local factors. He warned
that other nations would regard any such explanation on our part as
"eompletely transparent." Concerning any lack of GVN will to defend
itself, he commented, "A resolute United States would ensure...that this
lack were cured, as the alternative to accepting the loss." The JCS
member portrayed a U.S. failure in South Vietnem as an "abject humiliation,"

* 15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
