Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

--(3) Assuming no specific enemy counter-deployments,
are the added US forces likely to make a meaningful mili-
tary difference? (On the one hand, if we are now "past the
cross-over point,” cannot the military job be done without
the added forces? On the other, if the enemy can conduct
his terror "from the bushes,” can the military job be done
even with them?)

~-(4) Will the effect of any US additions be neu-
tralized, or stalemated, by specific enemy counter-deploy-
ments involving more forces from North Vietnam (and perhaps
introduction of more Chinese in North Vietnam and Chinese
and other "volunteers" into South Vietnam)?

--(5) Will the factors mentioned in (1) above generate
such impatience in the United States that "hawk" pressures
will be irresistible to expand the land war into Laos,
Cambodia and North Vietnam and to take stronger air and
naval actions against North Vietnam, with consequent risks
of a much larger war involving China and Russia and of even
more dove-hawk polarization at home and abroad?

The answer to Question 1 (regarding "dove" reaction), we
believe, is a qualified no. Barring escalation of the "external"
war discussed under Question 5, we believe that increased forces
will not lead to massive civil disobedience. However, a request
for Congressional authority to call Reserves would lead to
divisive debate.

Question 2 (relating to more efficient use of US forces)
is an important one, but its answer, even if most favorable, is
not likely to free-up enough personnel to satisfy a 200,000-
man request. It is true that one of the additional divisions
could be eliminated if the US Army eschewed the Delta, and cer-
tain of the other ground-force requirements could be eliminated
if the US Marines ceased grass-roots pacification activities.
Additional fractions might be trimmed if the ARVN (whose
uninspired performance is exasperating) were jacked up, if the
Koreans provided more combat or usable logistics personnel, or
if other third-country forces were forthcoming. Efforts along
this line should be made, but the items that prove out will not
go nearly as far as the 200,000 request.

Questions 3 and 4 (relating to the value of additional

US forces and possible enemy action to offset them) are very
difficult ones and can be treated together. In December 1965,

153 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
