Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SNGRET - Sensitive

of Finances Don was named Minister of Defense; and General Dinh was named
to the Ministry of Security (Interior). 30/ Only one cther general was+—
included in the cabinet of fifteen which was composed primarily of
bureeucrats and civilians with no previous experience. Political
figures, either opposed to Diem or not, were conspicuously absent from
the cabinet, a fact which would impair the new government's securing the
roots in popular support it would need in the long run. The announcement
of the new cabinet was followed by the release of "Provisional Constitu-
tional Act No. 1," signed by General Minh, formally suspending the 1956
constitution and outlining the structure and functions of the interim
government. 31,/ On November 6, Saigon radio announced the composition
of the Executive Committee of the Military Revolutionary Council. Minh
was Chairman, Don and Dinh were Deputy Chairmen, and nine other senior
generals, including Kim, Khiem, "little" Minh, Chieu, and Thieu were mem-
bers. Significantly, General Khanh was not.

On October 5, the new Foreign Minister had sent a note to the Mmbassy
informing the Ambassador officially of the change of govermment, and
expressing the hope that relations between the two countries would be
continued and strengthened. 32/ State approved Lodge's proposed reply
of recognition the following day, November 6, and, under the pressure of
other governments and the press, announced its intention to recognize
on Jiovember in Washington. 33/ The note of recognition was delivered
on November 8, when Lodge ealled on the new Foreign Minister, Pham Dang
Lam. 3h/ Lem, emphasizing his own insufficiencies for the job he had
been given, asked for Loige's advice which Lodge was apparently not
reluctant to give on a variety of topics. ‘The primary impression left
was that the new governtient would be heavily dependent on U.S. advice
and support, not only for the war effort, but also in the practicel prob-
lems of running the country.

In the first three weeks of November 1963, three problems pre-
occupied most Americans and Vietnamese in the new political and military
Sitvation created by the coup. The first of these was getting the new
government started, developing the relations between the new Vietnamese
officials and their American counterparts, and most importantly shaking
down the power relationships within the new regime. 35/ The first two
aspects of this problem would be self-resolving and were largely a matter
of time. With respect to the latter, it was clear from the outset that
General Minh was the dominant figure in the new government and was so
regarded by nearly all the military men. Tho, however, had exhibited
considerable independence during the negotiations over the cabinet,
reflecting his confidence that the generals felt they needed him, The
open question, then, was what degree of freedom of action the new cabinet
under Tho would have, or alternatively, how deeply the military council
intended to involve itself in running the country. This issue wes not
resolved in the public statements and communigques of the new regime and
ambiguity on the subject was clearly reflected in the lack of decisive-
ness and vigor of the new ministers and in their general uncertainty as

62 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ee,
