Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

hy Remove inhibitions on the use of Asian intelligence agents
in Cambodian-Laos border areas. 82/

By the end of another fortnight Khanh's mood had turned much’ more
strongly toward insistence upon his march to the North. On the morning
of 4 May 1964, Khanh asked Lodge to call, and Khanh began by asking if
he should make a declaration putting the country on a war footing. This,
he said would involve getting rid of "politicians" in the government and
having a government composed frankly of technicians. It would involve sus-
pension of civil rights ("as had been the case under Lincoln in your civil
war"). There would be a curfew, Saigon would cease to be a city of
pleasure, and plans laid to evacuate the diplomatic corps and two million
people. Khanh then said that an announcement should be made to Hanoi that
any further interference with South Vietnam’s internal affairs would lead
to reprisals, and Khanh specifically asked if the U.S. would be prepared
to undertake tit-for-tat bombing each time there was such interference.

_ Continuing, Khanh talked further, somewhat wildly, of defying Cambodia
and breaking diplomatic relations with France; and he even mentioned a
declaration of war against the DRV at one point. He conveyed the impres-
sion of a desperate desire to press for an early military decision by out-
right war with the DRV. Lodge sought to discourage this sort of adventur-
ism, but acknowledged that if the DRV invaded South Vietnam with its Army,
that act would raise a host of new questions of acute interest to the U.S.
Possible entry of Chinese forces would have to be considered. The question
then would be whether such an Army could be made ineffective by interdicting
its supply lines. He could not envision the U.S. putting into Asia an Army
the size of the U.S. Army in Europe in World War II. Khanh said that he
understood this but that an "Army Corps" of U.S. Special Forces numbering
10,000 could do in Asia as much as an Army group had done in Europe. "One
American can make soldiers out of 10 Orientals." /Sic!/ It was illogical,
wasteful, and wrong to go on incurring casualties "just in order to make
the agony endure."

Near the end of his report of this conversation, the Ambassador in-
serted this comment, "this man obviously wants to get on with the job and -
not sit here indefinitely taking casualties. Who can blame him?" Then
he added, as a further comment: }

His desire to declare a state of war.-..seems wholly in line
with our desire to get out of a "business as usual’ mentally.
He is clearly facing up to all the hard questions and wants us
to do it, too. 83/

lodge's report of Khanh's impatient wish to strike north drew an
immediate flash response from Rusk, which began with a statement that made
it clear that the message had been considered carefully at the White House.
Extremely grave issues were raised by the conversation, and reactions had

TOP SECRET = Sensitive
