Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Iv. Cc. 6.

' PHASE I IN THE BUILD-UP OF U.S. FORCES, THE DEBATE

MARCH - JULY 1965
SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS

The U.S. decision to deploy 44 US/FW battalions to Vietnam was the
product of a debate over strategy, but more basically, a debate over
Objectives. Once the consensus developed that the U.S. would neither
opt out of the conflict nor settle for a stalemate, 44 BLT's made more
sense than 17 BLT's (agreed to at Honolulu in April) or fewer. When it
emerged that the U.S. objective was to defeat the vc /NVA on the ground
in order to assure an "independent, non-communist South Vietnam," an
aggressive search and destroy strategy had to prevail over the more
experimental and cautionary enclave approach.

The decision was made swiftly and in an atmosphere of crisis. After
almost three months of euphoria (RVNAF was holding together and the Saigon
government was stable), four factors converged in late May and early June *
to set the decision full speed in motion: (1) Rolling Thunder was recog-
nized in itself as insufficient to convince Hanoi to negotiate; (2) on
l2‘June, the Quat government fell, and all the nightmares about no Saigon
political authority reappeared; (3) the Viet Cong, it was supposed, was
about to launch an all-out offensive, cut the country in two, and es-
tablish an alternate government-in-country; and (4) RVNAF, faced with an
unfavorable force ratio, quickly demonstrated that it could not cope.

The major participants in the decision knew the choices and under-
stood the consequences. The strategy of base security for the air war
against North Vietnam and the strategy of coastal enclaves were rejected
with the knowledge that a quick solution was no longer possible. Unlike -
the sending of Marines to Da Nang, the 44 BLT decision was perceived as
a threshold -- entrance into Asian land war. The conflict was seen to
be long, with further U.S. deployments to follow. The choice at that
time was not whether or not to negotiate, it was not whether to hold on
for a while or let go -- the choice was viewed as winning or losing ,
South Vietnam. Should negotiations come, should North Vietnam or the
Viet Cong elect to settle before this victory, the U.S. would then be
in @ position of strength.

1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
