Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

It seems to me that the mission of the Vietnamese
National Armed Forces should be to provide internal
security. The manpower and cost estimates (of the JCS)
would seem to be excessive in the above context.

The Secretary called a French request of $330 million to support the
French Expeditionary Corps, then expected to number 150,000 men
through 1955, and the Vietnamese plan to keep 230,000 men under arms
+ » - beyond what the United States should consider feasible to

support for maintaining the security of free Indochina at this time."
‘Instead, he called it "imperative" that the U.S. Government -- e.g.,
the JCS -- "prepare a firm position on the size of the forces we
consider a minimum level to assure the internal security of Indochina."

30/

A week later the Chiefs in turn objected. The idea
of training the VNA for internal security contradicted NSC 162/2
which "envisages reliance on indigenous ground forces to the maximun
extent possible" in territorial defense. Citing the threat from
"considerable numbers of Viet Minh guerrillas and sympathizers...
known to be or suspected of being within the territory of free Vietnam"
and the GVN "intention of requesting the phased withdrawal of the
French forces by 1956" the Chiefs said:

This would result in a complete military vacuum unless
the Vietnamese are adequately prepared to take over pro-
gressively as the French withdraw.

The force levels recommended on September 22 were reaffirmed as "the
minimum required ultimately to carry out the .. . objectives" of the
VNA, which should be "to attain and maintain internal security and to
deter Viet Minh aggression by a limited defense of the Geneva Armistice
demarkation line." The JCS pointed again to the unstable political
situation in Vietnam, the 342-man MAAG ceiling and concluded:

Under these conditions, US participation in training not
only would probably have but limited beneficial effect but
also would assume responsibility for any failure of the program.
In light of the foregoing and from a military point of view, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the United States should
not participate in the training of Vietnamese forces in
Indochina. However, if it is considered that political con-
siderations are overriding, the Joint Chiefs of Staff would
agree to the assignment of a training mission to MAAG,
Saigon, with safeguards against French interference with
the U.S. training effort. 31/

10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
