Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

militarily as well as from all other points of view. The crea-
tion of a separate Vietnamese Party will not therefore weaken
the military cooperation between the three Nations in the fight
they are waging against the imperialists. Later, however, if
conditions permit, the three revolutionary Parties of Vietnam,
Cambodia, and Laos will be able to unite to form a single Party:
the Party of the Vietnam-Khmer-laotian Federation." 99/

P. J. Honey stated in 1965 that one of the main requirements
of DRV foreign policy was "to impose Communist Vietnamese rule over Laos
and Cambodia," but noted that:

"Tt is open to debate whether this ambition for terri-
torial aggrandisement springs from the expansionist nature
of Communism, from the imperialist character of the Vietnamese
people which has shown itself repeatedly through their history
over the past millenium, or from the feeling that they had
played the major role in driving out French colonial power and
were therefore entitled to the fruits of their efforts. What
emerges very clearly is that the actions of the Vietnamese
Communists since 1951 are entirely consistent with the aim
set out in the document [quoted above/..+.

"North Vietnam shares a common frontier with Laos and undeter-
mined numbers of North Vietnamese soldiers have been operating on
Laotian territory for several years. Moreover, the nominal head
of the Pathet Lao, Prince Souphanouvong, has spent more years in
Vietnam than in Laos and is the husband of a senior Vietnamese
Communist. For both reasons Laos presents her with the ideal
circumstances for the pursuit of her expansionist aims. Addi-
tionally, the prosecution of the war in South Vietnam requires
that men and supplies be infiltrated into that state, and eastern
Laos provides the most secure and convenient route for such
tralries cc.

"Cambodia touches the territory of no Communist state and
is, in consequence, not amenable to the same tactics as those
employed in Laos. Instead, the Vietnamese Communist leaders
have attempted to cement relations with the established, non-
Communist government of Norodom Sihanouk in order to induce that
government to create as many embarrassments and difficulties as
possible for the rival Vietnamese regime in Saigon. By exploiting
historic Cambodia antagonisms towards neighbouring Thailand and
South Vietnam, they have achieved the rupture of diplomatic rela-
tions between Cambodia and these two states, but....Norodom
Sihanouk has reached the conclusion that China, not North Vietnam,
will exercise the dominant influence over South East Asia in the
years to come and has evinced a readiness to reach an accommodation
with the Chinese, whose objectives do not necessarily coincide with
those of the North Vietnamese at all points...." 100/

31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
