Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This early ROLLING THUNDER program had already scored some
immediate political and psychological gains. Prior to the bombing,
U.S. authorities were coping with what Presidential Assistant McGeorge
Bundy called a "widespread belief" that the U.S, lacked the will and
determination to do what was necessary in Southeast Asia. The initi-
ation of ROLLING THUNDER, followed by a series of military actions
which in effect made the U.S, a full co-belligerent in the war, did
much to correct that belief. The South Vietnamese were given an
important boost in morale, both by the show of greater U.S. support
and by the inauguration of joint retaliation against their enemy in
the North. Thailand and other countries in Southeast Asia, which had
been watching SVN slide rapidly downhill while the U.S. seemed to be
debating what to do, no doubt received the same kind of lift as well.

The bombing had also served several unilateral U.S. inter-
ests. It gave a clear signal to NVN -- and indirectly to China --
that the U.S. did not intend to suffer the takeover of SVN without a
fight. It served notice that if pressed the U.S. would not necessarily
recognize privileged sanctuaries. And it provided the U.S. with a
new bargaining chip, something which it could offer to give up in
return for a reduction or cessation of NVN's effort in the South.

Despite such gains, the overall effect of initiating

ROLLING THUNDER was somewhat disappointing. The hopes in some quar-
ters that merely posing a credible threat of substantial damage to
come might be sufficient "pressure" to bring Hanoi around had been
frustrated. U.S. negotiation overtures had been rejected, and Hanoi's
position had if anything hardened. Infiltration South had continued
and intensified. The signs indicated that Hanoi was determined to
ride out the bombing, at least at the levels sustained up to mid-1965,
while continuing to prosecute the war vigorously in the South. It was
evident that the U.S. faced a long-haul effort of uncertain duration.

Although the real target of the early ROLLING THUNDER

program was the will of NVN to continue the aggression in the South,

the public rationale for the bombing had been expressed in terms of
NVN's capability to continue that aggression. The public was told

that NVN was being bombed because it was infiltrating men and supplies
into SVN; the targets of the bombing were directly or indirectly related
to that infiltration; and the purpose of attacking them was to reduce
the flow and/or to increase the costs of that infiltration. Such a
rationale was consistent with the overall position which morally justi-
fied U.S. intervention in the war in terms of NVN's own intervention;
“and it specifically put the bombing in a politically acceptable military
idiom of interdiction.

ees TOP SECRET - Sensitive
