Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The briefing papers prepared for the conference merely affirmed
the prevalent belief when one concluded that:

"...There does not appear to be any great return to
be realized from further force increases. The best alter-
natives are to increase the effectiveness of the force
already employed. This may be done through improved
tactics and intelligence as well as through greater fire-
power and mobility." 10/

The same paper listed some of the factors that it believed might lead
to significant changes in Program #4. They were:

@) PRACTICE NINE - Should this concept be implemented
significant troop increases may be necessary. The physical
barrier on the east flank would require (according to MACY)
about 7700 additional personnel - 1 brigade, support and 2
NWMCBs. The remainder of the system would generate require-
ments for 2 or 3 more brigades (possibly ROK), an armored
cavalry squadron and support - a total Practice 9 force of
about 40,000.

b) Assuming the presently planned force levels and
combat pace, some minor reductions in construction and support
personnel should be possible in CY 1968. The magnitude and
phasing cannot be determined at this time but might total
10-15,000 personnel, beginning mid CY 1968.

ce) If the war against the hard-core VC/NVA units should
drop off sharply next year, it may be possible to withdraw
@ major slice of U.S, combat and support units - perhaps as
many as 100,000. This would encompass one or two divisions
and support and five to ten tactical fighter squadrons. Such
a step would reduce the overall cost of the war to the U.S.A.
and hopefully stimulate the GVN to play a more responsible
role. It would also lessen the economic dislocations caused
by the massive U.S. presence, and ease the burden in the U.S.
of supporting the effort in SEA. 11/

Interestingly only one of the three dealt with an increase while the
others concentrated wpon step-downs in U.S, strength. 12/ The barrier
remained a high probability -- plenning as we have seen (as well as some
stationing) was proceeding; the other two were definitely low probability
events. All of these consideretions at Guam could only lead the decision-
makers to conclude that although more troops would probably be requested,
their numbers would be relatively small.

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
