“<i

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

There is no question but what petroleum in the North
is an essential material for the movement, under present
circumstances, of men and equipment to their borders. But
neither is there any doubt that with, in effect, an unres-
tricted bombing campaign against petroleum, we were not
able to dry up the supply.

The bombing of the POL system was. carried out with as
much skill, effort, and attention as we could devote to it,
starting on June 29, and we haven't been able to dry up
those supplies....

We in effect took out the Haiphong docks for unloading
of POL and we have had very little effect on the importation
level at the present time. I would think it is about as
high today as it would have been if we had never struck
the Haiphong docks. And I think the same thing would be
true if we took out the cargo docks in Haiphong for dry
CALZO.++-

I don't believe that the bombing up to the present
has significantly reduced, nor any bombing that I could
contemplate in the future would significantly reduce, actual
flow of men and materiel to the South. 28/

Thus disenthralled with air power's ability to turn the
tide of the war in our favor, McNamara would increasingly in the months
ahead recommend against any further escalation of the bombing and turn
his attention to alternative methods of shutting off the infiltration
and bringing the war to an end.

B. Alternatives-- The Barrier Concept

1. Genesis

The fact that bombing had failed to achieve its objectives
did not mean that all those purposes were to be abandoned. For an option-
oriented policy adviser like McNamara the task was to find alternative
ways of accomplishing the job. The idea of constructing an anti-infiltration
barrier across the DMZ and the Laotian panhandle was first proposed in
January 1966 by Roger Fisher of Harvard Law School in one of his periodic
memos to McNaughton. 29/ The purpose of Fisher's proposal was to provide
the Administration with an alternative strategic concept for arresting
infiltration, thereby permitting a cessation of the bombing (a supporting
sub-thesis of his memo was the failure of the bombing to break Hanoi's
will). He had in mind a primarily air-seeded line of barbed wire, mines

145 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
