COPY

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

increased aid should be provided only if the French have made
real progress in giving the natives greater independence.

b. If we are to give greatly increased support, the French
must invite our close military advice in the conduct of the war in
Indochina,.

e. The French should give us renewed assurances regarding
passage of the ED.

ad. He, the President, would not propose to call Congress
back for an extra session to vote any additional funds for
Indochina.

e. We might invite Daniel to visit the United States and
be prepared to make a conditional comittment regarding further
support for Indochina operations.

Be: Action on this matter was somewhat delayed by the general

strikes in France, but on 1 September the State Department received
further, more detailed information from the French (paragraph 7 below),
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the French program, which
is based on the "Navarre Plan" described to General O'Taniel when he
visited Indochina some months ago. The JCS state (see Tab "C"),
Memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, 28 August 1953).

&. "“... a basic requirement for military success in
Indochina is one of creating a political climate in that
country which will provide the incentive for natives to
support the French and supply them with adequate intelli-
gence which is vital to the successful conduct of opera-
tions ... If this is accomplished and the Navarre con-
cept is vigorously pursued militarily in Indochina and
given wholehearted political support in France, it does
offer a promise of military success sufficient to warrant
appropriate additional U.S. aid required to assist.”

b- That information from Indochina indicates the
French are not pursuing agreements reached between
General O'Daniel and General Navarre as vigorously as
expseted. (Even more recent information from Saigon
indicates some slight improvement, however, )

ce. In light of the French slowness in following up
the Navarre concept, additinnal U.S. support "should be
conditioned upon continued implementation of French
support, demonstration: of French intent by actual per-
formance in Indochina, and continued French willingness
to receive and act upon U.S. military advice.”

