Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive

attacks near Hanoi might substantially raise the odds of
Peiping coming in with air.

Hanoi was expected to continue stepping up its infiltration both by land
through Laos and by sea, There were clear indications of different view-
points in Hanoi, Peiping, and Moscow with respect to "so-called wars of
liberation,” as well as continued friction between Moscow and Peiping.

However, neither such frictions nor the pressure of our
present slowly ascending pace of air attacks on North Viet-
nam can be expected to produce a real change in Hanoi's
position for some time, probably two to three months at
best.

The argument then proceeded to the key question of whether or not
Hanoi would continue to make real headway in the South. If it continued
to make such headway, even a major step-up in our air attacks would prob-
ably not make them much more reasonable. On the other hand if the situa-
tion in South Vietnam began to move against the VC and the going became
increasingly tough, then the "situation might begin to move on a political
track - but again not in less than two to three months, in our present
judgment." This was a significant departure from the theory for ROLLING
THUNDER propounded when that bombing pressure was inaugurated,

Following some considerations on immediate international moves and
more general political posture, the memo turned to "actions within South
Vietnam." Employing every useful resource to improve the efforts in the
South was defined as crucial. The paper indicated that the 41-point
program of non-military measures developed mainly by Ambassador Taylor
included promising elements and that the mission as well as agencies in _
Washington should develop additional points. McCone's suggestions for
largely covert actions were recommended for further study. Both the Rowan
(USIS) and the 2l-point program of General Johnson were viewed favorably,
as well as an increase in U.S. military support forces in Vietnam from
18,000 to 20,000 men, An increase in GVN manpower was also approved with
increased pay scales to be used as an inducement regardless of the mone-
tary costs. On one copy of this document that went to OSD, there was a
handwritten additional point that was, "change mission of Marine force,"
This significant addition was later adopted in NSAM-328.

The remainder of the paper was devoted, first, to U.S, and third
country combat forces in South Vietnam, and second, to actions against
North Vietnam and in Laos, These are of interest here only in the extent
to which they distracted from or supplanted counterinsurgency actions
within South Vietnam, So far as U.S. combat forces within South Vietnam
were concerned, there was cautious consideration of a small and gradual
buildup. But it was emphasized that because the reaction of the GVN and

5 Slee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
