Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page ©

197. Regarding...the assumption by the U.S, of the responsi-
bility for training the Vietnamese Army, Secretary Wilson
forwards the JCS view as representing the Defense Depart-
ment position to Secretary Dulles. Secretary of Defense
Letter to Secretary of State, 12 August 1954.......ceceeeeeee (LT

198. The JCS concur in the view that a statement of intent
to conclude a treaty establishing a collective security
arrangement in the Far East should be issued by the
countries which intend to be treaty members. The JCS
list the provisions which the treaty should incorporate.
JCS Memorandum for Secretary of Defense, 13 August 1954...... 719

199. Secretary Wilson expresses the Defense views on the draft
- "Southeast Asia Collective Security Treaty" which include
the JCS position. In his view, the recent developments
in Geneva and Indochina increases the urgency for a
"comprehensive United States policy with respect to the
Far East region as a whole." Secretary of Defense Letter
to Secretary of State, 17 August 1954.....cccccceccccecceecee [O29

200. Secretary Dulles replies to the JCS: 4 preconditions with
the assertion that “one of the most efficient means of
enabling the Vietnamese Government to become strong is to
assist it in reorganizing the National army and in train-
ing thet army." Even though Vietnam could not meet the
U.S. prerequisites, Dulles believes that strengthening the
army Was a prerequisite to political stability. Secretary
of State Memorandum to Secretary of Defense, 18 August
OSU patne oe uae eens vunainee sion oenniumamesecenaeewnsece (CO
201. The U.S. policy with respect to Southeast Asia provides
for negotiating a collective security treaty, considers
appropriate action in the event of local subversion, and
outlines political and covert action. NSc 5429/2,
DU AetSh: 1Obtacas ok aces oe cece Meceneokecaemmosemvaseacacee las

202. The President has approved the policy that henceforth
aid to Indochina would be direct rather than through
the medium of the French Government. Further, State
feels the Government should respond affirmatively to
Cambodia's request for assistance in training the Royal
Cembodian Army. Secretary of State Letter to Secretary
Of Defense, 26/Augist 1954. cus saw wes epabus ceneeceunswaruacs “The

203. Australia welcomes establishment of SEATO and is pre-
pared to make an increased military contribution to
the defense of the area. Australian Aide-Memoire,
Be Biscntet OGY ol a dicks Sopcale ee ot acest hy ee i uw Pe amen ees

Se: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
