Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

All through Ambassador Taylor's tenure, Hop Tac was something on
which he and the Mission Council pinned hope. General Westmoreland
thought the program had been reasonably successful, when he told the
- Mission Council about Hop Tac's first year:

“General Westmoreland said that while Hop Tac could be
said only to have been about 50% successful, it had undoubtedly
averted a VC seige of Saigon." 9/

This same view was reflected in McGeorge Bundy's comments in a memoran-
dum to the President months earlier in February, 1965, when he said:

"The Hop Tac program of pacification in this area has not
been an unqualified success, but it has not been a failure, and
it has certainly prevented any strangling seige of Saigon. We
did not have a chance to form an independent. judgment on Hop Tac,
but we did conclude that whatever its precise measure of success,
it is of great importance that this operation be pursued with full
vigor. This is the current policy of the Mission." 10/

There were others who said that, as a matter of fact, Saigon was almost
under seige and that the situation was deteriorating. Westmoreland's own
headquarters, for example, sent to Washington in the June Monthly Evalua-
tion from MACV, the following statement which seems to contradict West-
moreland's optimism:

"The sealing off of Saigon from surrounding areas, no
matter how incomplete the sealing may be, has had and will
continue to have serious economic as well as military effects." 11/

Shortly after he arrived in Vietnam for his second tour, Lodge asked for
a private assessment of Hop Tac from an Embassy officer, who reported to
him in early September of 1965:

"1. Hop Tac did not achieve its original goals primarily
because they were completely unrealistic and did not
take into account the difficulty of the task. These
goals were set quite arbitrarily and with no regard
for the available resources and the strength of the
enemy.

"2, The second reason for the failures of Hop Tac lies in
its strategic concept. The idea of concentric circles
ovtward from Saigon to be pacified in successive waves
of clearing, securing and developing may be sound in

’ macroscopic terms; when the Hop Tac area is looked at
earefully, the viability of this strategy breaks down.
The concentric phase lines around Saigon do not ade-
quately take into account existing areas of GVN
strength and existing Viet Cong base areas; rather

\ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
