Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

obtain results faster than under course of action A. Such
en eccelerated program would include the following actions:

“Again we must inform Khanh of our intentions, this
time expressing a willingness to begin military pressures
against Hanoi at once providing that he will undertake to
perform as in course of action A. However, U.S. action
would not await evidence of performance.

"Again we may wish to communicate directly on this
subject with Hanoi or awaiting effect of our military
actions. The scenario of the ensuing events would be
essentially the same as under Course A but the execution
would await only the readiness of plans to expedite, re-
lying almost exclusively on U.S. military means.

"Pros and cons of Course of Action B. ‘This course of
action asks virtually nothing from the Khanh Government,
primarily because it is assumed that little can be expected
from it. It avoids the consequence of the sudden collapse
of the Khanh Government and gets underway with minimum delay
the punitive actions against Hanoi. Thus, it lessens the
chance of an interruption of the program by an international
demand for negotiations by presenting a fait accompli to
international critics. However, it increases the likeli-
hood of U.S. involvement In ground action, since Khanh will
have almost no available ground forces which can be released
from pacification employment to mobile resistance of DRV
attacks. )
"Conclusion: It is concluded that Course of Action A
offers the greater promised achievement of U.S. policy ob- :
jectives in SVN during the coming months. However, we should '
always bear in mind the fragility of the Khanh Government and
be prepared to shift quickly to Course of Action B if the
situation requires. In either case, we must be militarily
ready for any response which may be initiated by NVN or by
CHICOMS.

"Miscellaneous: As indicated ebove, we believe that
34A operations should resume at once at maximum tempo, still
on @ covert besis; similarily, Desoto patrols should begin
advance operating outside 12-mile limit. We concur that a
number of VNAF pilots should be trained on B-57's between
now and first of year. There should be no change now with
regard to policy on evacuation of U.8. dependents.

"Recommendations: It is recommended that USG adopt Course

of Action A while maintaining readiness to shift to Course
of Action B." 15/

7 38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
