Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

bloody hill battles reminiscent of those fought in the late stages of

the Korean War. The mounting pressure of the enemy forces in and adjacent
to the DMZ not only prompted creation of Task Force OREGON but hastened
additions of artillery and air support units in the area. In the Western
Highlands of II Corps, OPERATION SAM HOUSTON terminated to be followed
immediately by OPERATION FRANCES MARION. This new operation retained the
original mission of its predecessor border surveillance and protection of
installations in the Pleiku-Kontum area. JUNCTION CITY continued in III
Corps tactical zone, but there was a notable decline in activity in that
area, possibly partially attributable to the thinning out of U.S. units to
provide for the dispositions to I Corps Tactical Zone. Some 53 ARVN
infantry battalions, one Ranger battalion, and one regional force battalion
were reported performing missions in direct support of Revolutionary Develop-
ment. Country-wide VC incidents directed at disruption of the RD effort
increased as the VC attempted to influence the hamlet elections conducted
during April. (See Figure 4, Monthly Evaluation (April 1967) map.)

In May attention focused on I Corps where heavy fighting continued.
Operation PRATRIE IV conducted by the Marines in conjunction with smaller
operations BEAU CHARGER, HICKORY and LAM SON was directed toward blocking
the major enemy infiltration into northern Quang Tri. Indications were
that the enemy was building wp in preparation for a probable coordinated
offensive and allied military activity was directed toward disrupting his
plans. Altogether 24 operations in I Corps tactical zone achieved "signif-
icant results," 14 of those-operations resulting in over 100 enemy killed.
U.S. Marines and ARVN forces also entered the DMZ for the first time and
reported over 800 enemy killed. In Southeastern Quang Ngai Province,
OPERATION MALHEUR conducted by Task Force OREGON reported 369 enemy killed
by the month's end. In II Corps FRANCES MARION continued to experience
heavy fighting in the border regions as border infiltration attempts by
large NVA/VC units continued on the upswing. (See Figures 5, 6, 7 and 8 for
Corps Monthly Operational Maps, May 1967.)

6. The Domestic Debate Continues: Polarization at Home

Domestic views about the war were beginning to polarize in early
February. Edmund Reischauer, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
expressed his dismay with the administration's persistent adherence to the
domino theory and its variations, one which he said was now "dropped in the
trash can of history wrapped in a Chinese rug." Student leaders in their
Washington Convention had denounced the draft system and urged the abolition
of selective service. In early February, 1,900 women marched upon the
Pentagon protesting the war policies and 5,000 American scientists, 17 of
them Nobel Prize winners, pleaded with the White House for a review of U.S.
policy on chemical and biological warfare in Vietnam. General Gavin was
urging before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee an immediate and uncon-
ditional halt of American bombing asking for what he termed "a strategy of
sanity." In early March, Robert Kennedy had delivered a strong speech in
the Senate calling for a halt to the bombing of North Vietnem, a proposal

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
