Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

deemed unlikely to launch an attack on the South unless there were unfore-
seen serious disturbances there:

"Not only are the DRV leaders bound to the Bloc by strong
ideological ties, but the very existence of the Communist regime
in North Vietnam is dependent on continued Bloc diplomatic,

military, and economic support. The Chinese Communists seem
to exercise somewhat greater influence than the USSR and have
given the DRV greater economic and diplomatic support....How-
ever, there is no evidence that Soviet and Chinese Communists
are at odds over North Vietnam."

"The Bloc has recently given less than full support to
Vietnamese reunification, to the perceptible discomfort of
the DRV. At the May 1956 meeting of the Geneva co-chairmen,
the Soviet Union tacitly accepted the status quo in Vietnam
for an indefinite period. In January 1957 the USSR further
recognized the long term nature of the division of Vietnam
when it proposed, as a countermove to Western proposals for
the admission of South Vietnam and South Korea, that both North
and South Vietnam and North and South Korea should be admitted
to the United Nations. Nevertheless, the DRV will almost cer-
tainly continue to be guided in its external course of action
by the general policy set down by Moscow and Peiping, although
it will continue to advocate a stronger policy on reunification."

"The DRV continues to maintain its apparatus for subversion
within South Vietnam and has the capability to infiltrate fairly
large numbers of military and political personnel into South Viet-
nam. Although the Communists in the South have been largely
quiescent, some trained military personnel remain, loosely
organized in small units that presumably could be reactivated
for missions of assassination, sabotage, or limited guerrilla
activity. South Vietnamese security forces intermittently dis-
cover cached Communist arms.

"Because the country-wide elections envisaged by the Geneva
Agreements have not been held and because military action. has
been prevented, the DRV has been frustrated in its hopes of
gaining control of South Vietnam. This has caused some discontent
among cadres evacuated from the South in the expectation that
they would soon return. Unification of the country remains a
principal objective of the DRV regime, end it continues to seek
support for its pretentions to emerge as the government of the
whole of Vietnam. Its ‘liberalization’ measures are designed to
appeal to the population of the South as well as the North. The
DRV has maintained its pose of adherence to the terms of the cease-
fire agreement concluded at Geneva while accusing the Republic of

15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

