Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As of mid-May, however, while there were some accomplishments, on the
whole there had been more discussion than action. Before the mid-May meet-
ing for Secretary McNamara in Saigon the status of progress was summarized
for him in the Mid-May Briefing Book as follows:

Ls The initiation of a two-week training program for district
chiefs had started and the first class had graduated.

2. Assignment had been made of one entire graduating class, 82
of them with three full years of training, to’be district chiefs.

3- Training of 75 hamlet action cadres for use in the Pacifica-
tion Plan hed been initiated.

4, Assignment of 700 Saigon civil servants to the III Corps
area had been completed (but two-thirds of them had returned by mid-
May as either unfit or in excess of needs).

2+ The long standing training programs for hamlet workers had
continued.

6. A course to train 2500 new village secretaries had been
initiated. :

Tee Assurance that all future graduates of NIA would be assigned
to the countryside had been made..

8. There was a promise to undertake to double the output of
. graduates from the NIA,

No action had been taken, however, on other measures. The most salient
inaction was the failure to set up the promised U.S.-GVN committee on
government reform. Further, the GVN was not inclined to provide incentive
pay to key rural workers.

At the time that Secretary McNamara and his party went to Saigon in
the middle of May, the problem areas with respect to implementation of
NSAM-288 recommendations were identified as follows:

sli Inadequate provision of piastres for proper utilization of
already trained officials and technicians.

2. Possible inability of GVN to get the job done without direct
U.S. participation, ;

30 Lack of information from the field on plans for aggressive
implementation of all aspects of this recommendation. 74/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

62
