Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section a8
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

a. Constitution of 1946

The 1946 basic law declared Vietnam to be a democratic
republic in which all power belonged to the people "without distinction
of race, class, creed, wealth, or sex." Its territory, "composed of
Bac-Bo, or Northern Viet Nam (Tonkin), Trung-Bo or Central Viet Nam (Annam),
and Nam-Bo or Southern Viet Nam (Cochinchina) is one and indivisible...
The capital of Viet Nam is Hanoi. 4/ However, the Constitution of 1946
was never institutionalized; instead, the exigencies of the war with the
French eventuated in a government which was literally an administrative
extension of the rigidly disciplined political apparatus headed by Ho Chi
Minh and encadred by his colleagues from the Indochinese Communist Party.
Pham Van Dong (presently Premier, then Vice President) announced in 1950
that promulgation of the 1946 Constitution had been postponed "because
several of its provisions require for their application the cessation of
the state of war," 5/ and in 1951, after Ho had openly aligned with the
Sino-Soviet powers, the Viet Minh radio explained that "a gang of traitors"
had been evolved in its formulation, and hence a “progressive character
was lacking." In late 1956, the DRV set up a constitutional reform com-
mivtee. 6/ In December, 1958, Ho invited the public to submit recommenda~
tions on a new draft basic law, and the second Constitution was promulgated

in 1960.

b. Constitution of 1960

The 1960 Preamble speaks of a thousand years of struggle
for independence, lauds Eo Chi Minh and the Lao Dong (Communist) Party,
eites harshly United States "imperialists" and "interventionists," and
presents this interpretation of the aftermath of Geneva, 1954-1960: 7/

",.«++In the South, the U.S. imperialists and their hench-
men have been savagely repressing the patriotic movement of
our people. They have been strengthening military forces and
carrying out their scheme of turning the southern part of our
country into a colony and military base for their war prepara-~
tions. They have resorted to all possiole means to sabotage
the Geneva Agreements and undermine the cause of Viet Nam's
reunification...."

",...Under the clear-sighted leadership of the Viet Nam
jao-Dong Party, the government of the Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam, and President Ho Chi Minh, our entire people,
broadly united within the National United Front, will surely
Win glorious success in the building of socialism in North
Viet-Nam and the struggle for national reunification."

Both the opening sentence of the Preanble and Article 1 of Chapter I of
the Constitution itself, stinulate that Viet Nam is an entity indivisible
from China to Camau in South Vietnem. Chapter II of the Constitution,
which precedes the.section on human rights, announces step by step that
the DRV is advancing from “people's democracy to socialism...transforming

2 , TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
