Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The GVN casualties of the second week in June were twice as high as
any previous week of the war. The VC casualties, which were reper ted to
exceed the ARVN total of 1 5672; were a mute testimony to the enemy's re-
generative capability and to his willingness to pay a heavy price in
order to destroy the GVN's fighting power. 17/ The success of his efforts
so far was made explicit on the 26th of June when COMUSMACV rated 5 ARVN
regiments and 9 separate battalions combat ineffective. At the end of Mey
the.figure had been 2 regiments and 3 battalions. 18/
2

By mid-Jume 1965, the Viet Cong summer offensive was in full stride.
Shifting the emphasis away from the areas of their early successes on the
periphery of "Hop Tac” and in the southern portion of I Corps, they began
the long-expected offensive in the highlands of II Corps. On the 25th of
June the district headquarters at Tou Morong in Kontum Province was in-
vested and then taken by an enemy force said to be a PAVN regiment rein-
forced with some Viet Cong troops. 19/ Other remote district headquarters
came under enemy pressure in the ensuing weeks until by 7 July a total of
six of them had been abandoned or overrun. The Viet Cong were systematically
forcing the GVN to yield what little control it still exercised in rural
areas outside the Mekong Delta. ’
}

Summing up the situation at the end of the week of 1} July, the CIA
said: "The initiative and momentum of military operations continue in
favor of the Viet Cong. The impact of Viet Cong operations is being felt
not only by the RVNAF but by the nation's internal economy as well.
Nothing this week points to the RVN wresting the initiative from the VC."20/

A major part of counterinsurgency thinking and planning in early 1965
was based on the concept of force ratios. In order to defeat the insurgent,
it was thought necessary to have a preponderance of force in favor of the
GVN of somewhere around 10 to l. al/ The actual ratio for that time period
was considerably less than 10 to 1 and was inclining in favor of the insur-
gents. In order to redress the situation, General Westmoreland advocated
accelerating the build-up of the RVNAF. 22/. To accomplish this, he said,
measures to increase induction and to curtail the shocking rates of deser-
tion would. have to be found. Unfortunately, any build-up strategy was
obviated by the events of late May-early June. General Westmoreland informed
CINCPAC on 7 June that the RVNAF build-up was to ‘be suspended until November
and that trainees would be used as fillers in heavily attrited units. 23/

If force ratios still were of paramount importance, then reinforcements for
the GVN side would have to come from other than domestic Vietnamese sources.

The enemy side of the force ratio was open to question since histori-

cally Viet Cong strength tended to be understated. The enemy order of
battle as reported on 17 March 1965 was as follows: 2k/

A a TOP SECRET - Sensitive
