Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

through January 1966 and beyond. 151/ When McNamara left Washington,
the 44 battalion debate remained unresolved. While he was in Saigon,

- he received a cable from Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance informing
him thet the President had decided to go ahead with the plan to deploy
all 34 of the U.S. battalions. 152/ The debate was over. McNamara
left Saigon bearing Westmoreland recommendations for an even greater
increase in forces which will be the subject of a later paper. 153/
"In many respects,” McNamara told the press on leaving Vietnam, "it
[the situation/ has deteriorated since 15 months ago when I was last

here." 154/ ~

There is no question that the key figure in the early 1965
build-up was the President of the United States. - In NSAM 328, he only
approved the modest input of two Marine battalions even though he was
presented with a JCS recommendation that three full divisions be sent.
The whole tone of the NSAM is one of caution. The President was deter-
mined that any changes authorized in that NSAM be understood as "being
gradual and wholly consistent with existing policy." 155/ He was
terribly concerned with control over release of information to the
press, and a premature leak from Saigon of some of the details of the
1-2 April NSC meetings brought a sharp response from him. 156/ The
subdued tones of NSAM 328 notwithstanding, the President apparently
lent his sanction to the broader proposals contained in the joint
State/Defense 7-point cable of 15 April, and in so doing he upset the
Ambassador. 157/

Most of the recommendations which came out of the Honolulu
Conference received early attention by President Johnson, but during
May things tended to slow down as his focus was diverted, no doubt, by
the situation in the Dominican Republic.

On the ith of May, the President sent a special message to the
Congress in which he requested a supplemental appropriation of $700
million "to meet mounting military requirements in Vietnam." He de-
scribed in that message the landing of U.S. Marines at Da Nang and
Phu Bai the more recent arrival of the 173rd Airborne. He went on to
say:

"Nor can I guarantee this will be the last request. If
our need expands I will turn again to the Congress. For we
will do whatever must be done to insure the safety of South
Vietnem from aggression. This is the firm and irrevocable
commitment of our people and Nation.”

And later in the seme message:

"I do ask for prompt support of our basic course: Re-
Sistance to aggression, moderation in the use of power, and
and a constant search for peace." 158/

109 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
