Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Basically solution in both South Vietnem and Iaos will
require combination military pressure and some form of communi-
cation under which Hanoi (and Peiping) eventually accept idea
of getting out. Negotiation without continued military action
will not achieve our objectives in foreseeable future...After,
but only after, we have established clear pattern pressure
hurting DRV and leaving no doubts in South Vietnam of our
resolve, we cotld even accept conference broadened to include
Vietnam issue." (Underlining in original.)

On the touchy aspect of US/GVN relations, it simply said:

"Joint US/GVN planning already covers possible actions
against DRV and the Panhandle, Jt can be used in itself to
ma&intein morale of GVN leadership, as well as to control =:
and inhibit any unilateral GVN moves.” 14/

The Taylor reply to the above message differed only in emphasis.

",..Underlying our analysis is the apparent assumption
of DepTel 439 (which we believe is correct) that the present
in-country pacification plan is not enough in itself to main-
tain National morale or to offer reasonable hope of eventual ~
success. Something must be added in the coming months.

"Statement of the problem - A. The course which U.S.
policy in South Vietnam should take during the coming months -
can be expressed in terms of four objectives. The first and
most important objective is to gain time for the Khanh govern-
ment to develop a certain stability and to give some firm
evidence of viability. Since eny of the courses, of action
considered in this cable carry a considerable measure of risk
to the U.S., we should be slow to get too deeply involved
in them until we have a better feel of the quality of our
ally. In particular, if we can avoid it, we should not get
involved militerily with North Vietnam and possibly with
Red China if our base in South Vietnam is insecure and Khanh's
Army is tied down everywhere by the VC insurgency. Hence,
it is to our interest to gain sufficient time not only to allow
Khanh to prove that he can govern, but also to free Saigon
from the VC threat which presently rings it and assure that
sufficient GVN ground forces will be available to provide a
reasonable measure of defense against any DRV ground reaction
which may develop in the execution of our program and thus
avoid the possible requirement for a major U.S, ground force
commitment.

"\ second objective in this period is the maintenance
of morale in South Vietnam, particularly within the Khanh govern-
ment. This should not be difficult in the case of the govern-
ment if we can give Khanh assurance of our readiness to bring
added pressure on Hanoi if he provides evidence of ability

35 ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
