Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in convincing the French to mend their colonial ways and to pursue the
war with American methods, diligence, and aggressiveness. The French,
long noted for proficiency and precision in logic, required no Descartes
to realize that the United States was thus asking France (1) to regain full
responsibility for the Indochina War, and in particular for fighting and
taking casualties in that war; (2) to follow the "guidance" and "advice"
of the United States on the exercise of this French responsibility; and
(3) having fought the war, presumably to a successful conclusion, to re-
linguish control over Indochina. In view of the French willingness to
retain responsibility for the war, it is not surprising that they were
reluctant, at best, to accept propositions (2) and (3). Despite French
pronouncements on their role in fighting communism, there is little reason
to believe that they regarded the Indochina war in the same light as the
U.S. viewed the Korean War. Rather, their behavior resembled that of
other colonial powers who had fought to retain profitable colonies.

b. Slim Chance Accepted by the U.S.

Had U.S. policymakers recognized the slimness of the chance
of persuading France to accept the three propositions specified above,
they might have sought alternative courses of action in Indochina. As
it was, the possibility (as opposed to the probability) of success was
their prime consideration, and, overestimating U.S. leverage for influ-
encing a favorable outcome, alternatives were not considered.

c. Circular U.S. Policy

Suppression of alternatives, both on the general and the
particular level (see Note 48 for an example of the latter), led to a
circularity in and reinforcement of existing policies -- constant forced
choices between "bad" and "worse." 53/

d. Poor Bargaining

Having taken a hard policy line toward the French, the United
States failed to bargain effectively. Thus, in circumstances not totally
dissimilar from those prevailing in Vietnam in subsequent time periods,
the U.S. continued to provide assistance disregarding infractions of pre-
conditions; moreover, the pre-conditions for aid were not modified. With-
out modification, the conditions became worse than meaningless: standing
testaments to U.S. impotence, to be recognized only when and how the French
chose. The U.S. became virtually a prisoner of its own policy. Contain-
ment of communism, concern for the French in relation to the postwar Europe
of NATQ, EDC, and the Soviet threat in the West, combined with a fear,
based on World War II strategy, that a French withdrawal from Indochina.
would leave exposed the U.S. flank in Korea, all compelled the U.S. to
continue aid. Yet none of these considerations should have precluded
modification of the U.S. bargaining strategy.

e. Misinformation

The U.S. policymaking machinery was highly vulnerable to
spoofing, on at least three counts: (1) the very strength of the U.S.

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
