Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. The French Expeditionary Corps, with a force of 176,000
men in October 1954, figured heavily in U.S.-French plans for the
defense of South Vietnem, In effect, the FEC was planned to be the
shield behind which training of the VNA could be conducted, free of
major concern over a Viet Minh attack across the 17th parallel.
Unfortunate from the point of view of these plans were the major policy
disputes that plagued -- and finally did in -- joint U.S.-French acti-
vities in Vietnen. i

{

Dominant among U.S.-French disagreements were the French reluc-
tance to support the Diem Government and the apparent French attitude of
conciliation toward the Communists in both North and South Vietnam devends
at a minimum on an early and convincing demonstration by the French of
their wholehearted support." 62/ It was particularly frustrating not
only that no such "wholehearted support" was forthcoming but also that
considerable evidence tended to support the belief that the French were
actively ettempting to overthrow Diem during the period they remained in
Vietnam. 63/

'. French reluctance to support Diem -- or, as the U.S, estimated,
"any nationalist government" 6:/ -- was consistent with their attitude
toward Communist North Vietnam. Although Generals Collins and Ely
enjoyed a cordial relationship of mutual trust, there is considerable
‘ evidence that Ely was, in a sense, the victim of both his superiors in
the French Government and of his subordinates in Vietnam. Thus while
Collins almost never expressed doubts regarding Ely's statements to him
(and never of his integrity), French politics both high- and low-level,
were particularly intense and seemed to be directed toward preservation
of French commercial and cultural influence in both North and South
Vietnam. The high-level French mission to Hanoi, the Saintenay Mission,
was in particuler regarded as evidence of French duplicity, although
General Ely, in his memoirs, dénies such duplicity. 65/ Suspected French
assistance to the sect forces opposing the Diem Government and French
activities within the joint U.S.-French Training Relations Instruction
Mission were also consistent with the policy of preservation of French
interests.

For some time U.S. policymakers had been thinking seriously
about going it alone in Vietnam without the French. When at the Washing-
ton Conference in Sentember 195%, the French delegates discussed their
intentions to cut the FEC to 100,000 by the end of 1955 and asked for
$330 million in U.S, support for the FHC et that level, the reaction
among U.S. decision makers was negative. On November 5 it was decided
that on balance the U.S, would probably fare better in Vietnem without
the French, and it was tentatively egreed thet the U.S. should not con-
tinue its support that had been requested, but should limit the contri-
bution to $100 million. In their view a complete withdrawal of the FEC
in 1055 would create a vacuum that only the Viet Ninh could fill, for the
VNA would remain incapable of coping even with Viet Minh irregular forces

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

13
