Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

From this humble beginning there followed a period of gradual expansion
altogether compatible with the security mission until by the end of
March the Da Nang TAOR was 12 square miles in size and incorporated
some 11,141 Vietnamese souls. 90/

Accompanying the NSAM 328 change of mission of U.S. forces to
permit limited offensive operations was a dilemma. Mere expansion of
the TAOR's would not suffice since U.S. forces did not have enough com-
bat power to adequately secure an area the size of which they desired
for offensive operations. Some arrangement was needed to allow U.S.
commanders to share tactical responsibility with the Vietnamese.

Years of experience advising the Vietnamese armed forces was
enough to convince knowledgeable U.S. officers that the U.S. did not
want to relinquish command authority over its troops to the Vietnamese.
Of equal import, it was felt, was the Vietnamese experience under the
French and the resultant abhorrence of foreign command over their forces.
As a further complication, the Viet Cong were ready to cry "imperialist
puppet” at the first sign of GVN weakness. Washington was less sensitive
to this problem than were the members of the Mission in Saigon. In May
Secretary McNamara urged Westmoreland and Taylor to form a joint command
structure with the GVN. Unfortunately, both of those gentlemen were
well aware that the GVN was very cool to the idea. 91/ On the 23rd of
April Taylor had visited with Prime Minister Quat for the first time
since the Honolulu Conference. Although Quat was well aware of the
Ambassador's intention to convey the text of the Honolulu recommendations,
to Taylor's distress, he was reluctant to even discuss foreign reinforce-
ments much less command arrangements. 92/

In an attempt to get things unstuck, General Westmoreland pro-
duced a concept for the employment of U.S./Allied ground combat forces
in support of RVNAF. With Ambassador Taylor's concurrence, he forwarded
the concept through CINCPAC to Washington on 8 May. Westmoreland pro-
posed that the "basic concept underlying command relations between
U.S./Allied forces and RVNAF will be one of combat support through
coordination and cooperation in the mutual self-interest of both commands.”
That this tenuous arrangement might break down in the face of imminent
disaster was foreseen and included was an emergency escape clause whereby
alternate arrangements could be made through mutual agreement of the
tactical commanders on the ground. Westmoreland suggested that U.S. /Allied
forces would pass through three distinct stages of eommitment to the war.
Stage I (to which were already committed 9 U.S. battalions) entailed the
security of base areas with TAOR's extended out to the range of light
artillery. Stage II called for deep patrolling and offensive operations,
both predicated on movement outside the TAOR in coordination with RVNAF.
Finally, progress would be made into Stage III with long range search and
destroy and reserve reaction operations in concert, of course, with
Vietnamese wishes and desires. 93/

80 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
