Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

+roops was Lyndon Johnson.) It does not prove that Kennedy behaved soundly
in 1961. Many people will think so; but others will argue that the most
difficult problem of recent years might have been avoided if the U.S. had
made a hard commitment on the ground in South Vietnam in 1961.

Vo ‘THE TREATY REQUEST

As to Diem, we have, of course, even less in the way of a record from
which to judge what he really thought he was doing. But it is not hard to
understand why he should be reluctant to accept U.S. combat troops. His
stated reason was always that sending U.S. combat units would signal the
end of the Geneva Accords, But this explanation explains little. Diem
thought the Geneva Accords were betrayal of Vietnam in 1954, and a farce,
freely violated by the communists, later. Consequently, he would be con-
cerned about their demise only if North Vietnam could use this as a pretext
for an overt invasion, But North Vietnam had long had a suitable pretext
for an invasion in Diem's refusal to discuss the elections called for
under the Geneva Accords, Diem's shield was the threat of U.S. interven-
tion, not the Geneva Accords, and it is mighty hard to see how this
shield could be weakened by putting American troops on the ground in South
Vietnam,

But there were other reasons for Diem to be wary of U.S. troops. For
one thing, not even Diem's severest critics questioned his commitment to
Vietnamese nationalism, The idea of inviting foreign troops back into
Vietnam must surely have been distasteful even once he decided it was un-
avoidable, Further, the presence of American troops in Vietnam had a very
ambivalent effect on the risk to Diem of a military coup. To the extent
American troops increased the sense of security, they would lessen the
likelihood of a coup, which the military rationalized mainly on the grounds
that they could not win the war under Diem. But the larger the American
military presence in the country, the more Diem would have to worry about
American ability and temptation to encourage a coup if Diem incurred
American displeasure,

The net impact of these conflicting effects would depend on the
security situation in Vietnam, If Diem felt strong, he would probably not
want American troops; if he felt weak, he might see no choice but to risk
inviting the Americans in. Even at the time of the Taylor mission, we
will see Diem is most erratic on this issue.

Against this background, it is easy to understand why Diem, when the
situation got worse in September, should have "pointed the question" at
whether the U.S, would give him a treaty, rather than whether the U.S,
would send in troops. As far as we can see, he was mostly concerned about
what the latest VC attacks were doing to confidence in his regime, rather
than any fear that the VC, still estimated at fewer than 20,000 strong,
were going to defeat the quarter million regulars and auxillaries in his
own forces, What he probably wanted was an unambiguous public commitment

° 6&9
: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
