Ce

Al

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

P SECRET ~ Sensitive

and reconstructing the national railroad. The priority
effort of ARVN forces will be in direct support of the
Revolutionary Development program; in many instances, the
province chief will exercise operational control over these
units. This fact notwithstanding the ARVN division struc-
ture must be maintained and it is essential that the division
commander enthusiastically supoort Revolutionary Develop-
ment. Our highly capable US Division Commanders, who are
closely associated with corresvonding ARVN commanders, are

in a position to influence thes to do what is required.

We intend to employ all forces to get the best
results measured, among other things, in terms of population
secured; territory cleared of enemy influence; VC/NVA bases
eliminated; and enemy guerrillas, local forces, and main
forces destroyed.

Barring unforeseen change in enemy strategy, I
visualize that our strategy for South Vietnam will remain
essentially the same throughout 1967. 169/

General Westmoreland had already reached agreement with General Vien,
Chief of the Joint General Start (IGS), to reorient ARVN to pacification
support. General Tillson, MACV J-3, had briefed the Mission Council in
Saigon on the general plan:

In the 1967 campaign plan, we propose to assign ARVN the
primary mission of providing direct support to RD and US/FW
Forces the primary mission of destroying VC/NVA main forces
and base areas. Agreement has been reached between General
Westmoreland and General Vien that, in I, II, and III Corps
areas, ARVN will devote at least 50% of its effort directly
in support of the RD program. In IV Corps, where there are
no US forces, it was agreed that ARVN might have to devote
up to 75% of its effort to offensive operations....170/

General Taylor, now serving as a personal advisor to President
Johnson, immediately recognized the importance of this communication.
A considered response should be sent to COMUSMACV, he advised the Presi-
dent, lest General Westmoreland regard silence as tacit consent for his
proposed strategy. Taylor was enthusiastic about the expressed intent to
reemphasize revolutionary development (pacification), seeing in it the
best hope for bringing the war to a speedier conclusion. But he was
uneasy about future charges that the U.S, had taken over the main war
and was sustaining larger numbers of casualties than RVNAF. He was also
concerned about involving any U.S, troops in pacification -- suggesting
that U.S. displacement of GVN leadership would, in the long run, be
counterproductive. 171/

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

