Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to the Secretary was that the JCS be asked to develop a strike plan based
on the assumption that a decision was made to implement the third alterna-
tive. 12h/

It is clear that the JCS not only preferred the larger attacks --
directed against both DRV capabilities and will -- but intended that they
be implemented in the near future. However, there is no indication that
the CJCS urged prompt implementation -- even of the limited measures he
linked with pressures against DRV will alone. Neither view was supported.
with an explanation of why it was expected that the preferred course of
action might be successful or with any analysis of what lesser results
might lead to in the way of next steps by either side or of likely public
reactions.

F. The President Decides.

The Presidential reaction to these various patterns of advice
and the different assessments of national interest is not evident in the
available documents. However, it can be surmised from the pattern of events
surrounding the effort to obtain a Congressional resolution. As will be
recalled, a resolution was recommended to the President in late May as one
of a series of events to include the Canadian's mission to Hanoi, the Hono-
lulu Conference, and consultations with allies. It also fit in with the
emphasis on public information and a firm posture that stemmed from the
Honolulu meeting. Its intended purpose was to dramatize and make clear
to other nations the firm resolve of the United States Government in an.
election year to support the President in taking whatever action was neces-
sary to resist commmist aggression in Southeast Asia.

The week of 8 June saw the planning for a Congressional resolu-
tion being brought to a head. By 10 June there was firm support for it
on the part of most agencies, despite recognition that obtaining it would
require a vigorous public campaign, a likely requirement of which would be
a "substantial increase in the commitment of U.S. prestige and power to
success in Southeast Asia." Therefore, at the meeting held on that day,
five basic "disagreeable questions" were identified for which the Adminis-
tration would have to provide convincing answers to assure public support. 125/
These included: (1) Does this imply a blank check for the President to go
to war in Southeast Asia? (2) What kinds of force could he employ under
this authorization? (3) What change in the situation (if any) requires
the resolution now? (4) Can't our objectives be attained by means other
than U.S. military force? (5) Does Southeast Asia mean enough to U.S.
national interests?

By June 12, after a temporary diversion caused by Souvanna Phouma's
withdrawal and reaffirmation of permission to continue the reconnaissance
flights, much of the rationale in support of the resolution was formulated.
Even though the Administration did not expect "to move in the near future
to military action against North Vietnam," it recognized that significant
changes in the local situations in both Laos and South Vietnam were beyond

.

38
