Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

large amounts of rice. Depending on the success of interdiction efforts,
such imports might overload the transport system. The levees themselves
could be repaired in a matter of weeks, however, and any military effects
of bombing them would be limited and short-lived. 8/

An "unlimited" campaign against transportation and remaining
targets, in addition to attacking industry and mining the harbors and
waterways, would greatly increase the costs and difficulties in maintaining
the flow of the most essential military and civilian goods within NVN.

If the attack on transportation were able to cut the capacity of the rail-
roads by 1/3 on a sustained basis and roads by 1/4, the remaining available
route capacity would not be sufficient to satisfy NVN's minimum daily needs:

If an unlimited interdiction program were highly suc-
cessful, the regime would encounter increasing difficulty
and cost in maintaining the flow of some of their most
essential military and economic goods. In the long term the
uncertainties and difficulties resulting from the cumulative
effect of the air campaigns would probably cause Hanoi to
undertake a basic reassessment of the probable course of
the war and the extent of the regime's commitment to it. 9/

By contrast, according to the CIA analysis, restricting the
bombing to the Panhandle of NVN and Iaos would tend to strengthen Hanoi's
will. ‘The main effect would be to force NVN to increase the repair labor
foree in southern NVN and Laos by about 30 percent, which could easily
be drawn from other areas no longer being bombed. The flow of men and
supplies would continue. NVN would regard the change in the bombing pat-
tern as a clear victory, evidence that international and domestic pressures
on the U.S. were having an effect. It would be encouraged to believe that
the U.S. was tiring of the war and being forced to retreat. 10/

Other considerations, however, were dominant in Washington
at the highest levels. In mid-January another effort to communicate posi-
tions with the DRV had been made and there was an understandable desire
4o defer escalatory decisions until it had been determined whether some
possibility for negotiations existed. 11/ Moreover, the TET holiday at
the beginning of February, for which a truce had been announced, made late
January an inpropitious time to expand the bombing. Thus, on January 28,
ROLLING THUNDER program #53 authorized little more than a continuation of
strikes within the parameters of previous authorizations. ee

2. The TET Pause -- 8-1) February

As noted in the previous section of this paper, the Chiefs
had recorded their opposition to any truce or military standdown for the
holidays in late November. 13/ On January 2, General Westmoreland had
strongly recommended against a truce for TET because of the losses to
friendly forces during the Christmas and New Year's truces just concluded. 1h/

3 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
