Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fount
AEE 125
eave THE STATEWAR-NAVY COORDINATING COMMITTEE

WASHINGTON, B.C,

eat May 23, 19)5 ;

WH = MMe. Bonbright:
! i]
Herewith extract of minutes of SCC mesting held April 13,
IS, dealing with the subject "Use of Indo-China Resistance
Forces." Item b at the end is, I think, what you are after:

N32 USE OF INUO-CHiNe me ISTANCE FORGE

(Keenda ftom flo. 2 — Sia — Sco 35/ >

Cra
A! I ie MR, LOVETT steted that he took no exception to dispatch
- ‘ \ As of the note to the French eee revised as sugcested by
‘ Hr, Dann, but pointed out that this note covers only @ small
‘ segment of the entire problem. Ne added that the question of

our Indo-China policy is a matter of lively military interest
and that the a ek of a policy is a source of serious embarr~
asemont to the atlitery. He pointed out that Admirel Fenerd
has teen using os technique of suimittiing 4 series of questions
to various agencies of the United States Government and by ob-
a taining even negative or non-committal responsas thereto has
been in effect writing Anerican policy on Indo-China,
Althourh Acniral Fenard has stated that he is convinced of our
sood faith in this matter, the pattern is such that suspicions
have arisen in Paris as to the real United States positions

ER, LOVELT urged the at this question be reconsidered in the
licht of three considerations:

a. iInde-China is in the China Theater. The Censral-
4s8imo is in suprene comand of the Chine Theater and
General Jedan meyer commands only the U. S. forces therein.
Accordingly, uncer oresent comand arrancements, the
question of civil acninistration in eoabeMeine duxing the
period of nelit ory oceupation micht more appropriately be
referred to the Chinese rather than to the. Us S. Govern

i metite
b The Combined Chiefs of Start heve asrecd that the _,
French should nos participata. in operational Planning in

tne Far Sast until detailed planning for lihsration = hy
Indo-Ghins is undertaken. Yo dates, the Freiich have nok <i
3 =

ae been infomied that thers are no major opsrations con sa

i cars, plated toward dirset, Liberation of Inde-Taina. =
‘@ Wess C, The British are actively assisting the French fron
— ; the Southeast Asia Command (Lerd Mountbatten) in operations
aa oe a fim inde-china, Ef the French are Informed that no opera
acts tions ars plennsd ty the t. 5» from the China Theater’ for

so a . , T 4 o re: 9 SECT wer is

i
et +

¥,

fO0°D1

week peat

C7 .c

at
