Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

continued sharp friction between Moscow and Peiping. However,
neither such frictions nor the pressure of our present slowly
ascending pace of air attack on North Vietnam can be expected
to produce a real change in Hanoi's position for some time,
probably 2 - 3 months, at best.

A key question for Hanoi is whether they continue to make
real headway in the south, or whether the conflict there starts
to move against them or at least appear increasingly tough. If
the former, even a major step-up in our air attacks would
probably not cause them to become much more reasonable; if the
latter, the situation might begin to move on a political track
-- but again in not less than 2 - 3 months, in our present
judgment.

B. International Diplomatic Moves

On the diplomatic front, there had been no indication of any
desire for talks from Henoi, Peking, or Moscow. The British Co-Chairmen
initiative had been turned down by the Soviet Government, which first
floated a totally unaccentable counterpropnosal -- in the form ofa
statement condemning the U.S. "gross violation of the Geneva Accords"
and calling on the U.S. "to immediately cease their aggressive acts
against the DRV and to withdraw their troops..." -- and then totally
rejected the British proposal. By March 16, when Gromyko met with UK
Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart in London, it had become guite clear
that the two Geneva Co-Chairmen would not be able to agree on a message
sufficiently objective to be mutually acceptable to other members of

the Conference. 107/ Gromyko had made a public statement after the
meeting in London to the effect that the United States would have to
deal directly with Hanoi on the Vietnam situation, to which Secretary
Rusk had replied. 108/

I agree with Mr. Gromyko that Hanoi is the key to peace
in Southeast Asia. If Hanoi stops molesting its neighbors,
then peace can be restored promptly and U.S. forces can come
home. I regret thet the Soviet Union, which was a signatory
of the 1954 and 1962 accords, appears disinclined to put its
full weight behind those agreements.

A second initiative had been launched by President Tito of Yugoslavia
in early March. Tito had written to President Johnson on March 3, urging
immediate negotiations on Vietnam without either side imposing conditions.
The President had replied on March 12, describing the packground of our
involvement in Vietnam and stating that there would be no bar to 4
peaceful settlement if Hanoi ceased "aggression against South Vietnam."

Tito's concern prompted him to convene a conference of 15 nonaligned
nations which met in Belgrade from March 13 to 18 and issued an appeal,
ultimately signed by 17 nations. (Afghanistan, Algeria, Cyprus, Ceylon,

83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
