Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

concept may have been ~~ and in view of demonstrated Viet Cong and DRV
flexibility it is not clear thet the concept was completely unsound --~
it was never successfully implemented. The VNA, gradually transformed
into ARVN, was organized and trained along U.S. lines (at least in the
view of those doing. the training and reporting on their progress 97/
and by the end of 1958 MAAG was able to state that "The combat posture
of the Vietnamese Armed Forces has improved to a marked degree in the
past few years. At the end of CY 1958, the Vietnamese Army, compared
with other army forces in Southeast Asia, reached a relatively high
degree of combat effectiveness...." 58/ But the Civil Guard and the
Self-Defense Corps were never brought to the stage of development at
which they might have relieved the army of the internal security mission
for which its new-found organization, training, and equipment were
rendering it unfit.

As far as can be estimated on the basis of available information,
training within Vietnam was conducted in as centralized a fashion as
possible. Limited availability of personnel end GVN opposition pre-
cluded posting of U.S. advisors to lower than airborne brigade level
until 1961, eos the need for advisors at lower levels was well.
recognized. _99f Training methods were, as far as can be judged,
standard U.S. methods minimally adapted to the Vietnamese context;
standard training cycles similar to U.S. programs were employed; ex-
tensive use wes made of translated U.S. training films and training
and field manuals. Extensive training of Vietnemese officers in the
U.S. was conducted. Combat and support units, especially Bogus Ce
wits, benefited equally from U.S. methods and procedures. - Equipment
(including personal gear) reflected U.S. taste in kind, if not in
quality. And U.S. organizational preferences became fully realized
when, in 1959, the agitation begun by General O'Daniel during the Indo-
china war had its full flowering in the reorganization of the Vietnamese
Army into a General Headquarters, Field Command, six Military Region
Headquarters, two Corps Headquarters and Corps Troops, one provisional
Corps Headquarters, and seven standard divisions of 10,500 men each. By
1959 these forces were judged capable of maintaining internal security
and. of providing limited initial resistance to any renewed aggression
from the Narth. 100/ . .

In spite of all this progress, however, MAAG statements in 1959
reveal that many of the problems and deficiencies found in the VNA of
1954 and noted above were still to be found in the ARVN of 1659: 101, /
although force size had been settled by fiet, it was still e troublesome
problem particularly vis-a-vis the GVN which persisted in its desire for
larger forces; force structure was still uncleer, perticulerly with
reference to command and control; es the abortive coup of 1960 was to
show, high-renking officers were still politically active ; 200/ plans
for an internal security program relied heavily on the vixbuat ly non-
existent capabilities of the Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps;

TOP SECRHT - Sens sitive
