, “ee;

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

: SECRET

Comments
Here are some additional thovghts: :

a. _ President Diern said that if it hadn't been for the dedicated
“anti-communism of about a million Catholics, Vietnam could never
have kept going this long, Yet his brother, Archbishop Thuc, told
me that the refugees from the north (including many Catholics) had
been settled into such remuneratiye new lives in the south that they
had gone soft, no longer wanted to fight, and criticized the govern- :
ment for wanting to continue the war, Also, the Saigon-Cholon area is
secthing with political discontent while the people are far better off
in material possessions than ever before. The shops are full of goods
for Tet and the people are buying heavily, Somehow, the U, S, has
filled their bellies but has neglected their spirit.

"b. Many of the Vietnamese in the countryside who wepe right
up against the Viet Cong terror were full of patriotic spirit. Those
who seerned to be in the hardest circumstances, fighting barefoot
end with makeshift weapons, had the highest morale, They still can
lick the Viet Cong with a little help. There's a lesson here on our
giving aid, Maybe we should learn that our funds cannot buy friends
or a patriotic spirit by mere materialistic giving. Perhaps we should
help those who help themselves, and not have a lot of strings on that
help. ae

¢. The Viet Cong crowded a lot of action into the year 1960,

They infiltrated thousands of armed forces into South Vietnam,
recruited local levies of military territorials and guerrillas, and
undertook large scale guerrilla and terroristic operations. In so
.doing, they neglected doing sound political work at the grass roots
level and broke one of Mao Tse Tung's cardinal rules. Many people -
in the south now under their thumb are unhappy about it, but too
tervified to act against these new rulers. The Viet Cong apparently

.. have been working hard recently to rectify this error; and now have
political cadres in the field. We still have a chance of beating them
if we can give the people some fighting chance of gaining security

+ and some political basis of action, Since both of these actions will
have to be carried out by Vietnamese forces in their Defense estab-
lishment, it is worthwhile to make U.S. help to the Vietnamese in
the contested provinces along these sorely needed lines a priority
mission of the U,S, military in Vietnam. The political actions should

be fhe implementing of Vietnamese governmental policy ty Vietn 1riése

it

PU Srila Se oe ae ees es a

7. at a fle aie ok
= PS Se 2 a ae ee BN pits ng a =

Gies Neue
i) a ae 76
