Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

peacetime, in Thailand, Indonesia, and Burma. Are we

to walk away from the South Vietnamese, at least as a

matter of principle, simply because they failed in what was
always conceded to be a courageous and extremely difficult
effort to become a true democracy during a guerrilla war? 130/

Bundy took pointed issue with the DPM's reformulation of
U.S. objectives. Starting with the DPM's discussion of U.S. larger
interests in Asia, Bundy argued that:

In Asian eyes, the struggle is a test case, and indeed
much more black-and-white than even we ourselves see it.
The Asian view bears Little resemblance to the breast-
beating in Europe or at home. Asians would quite literally
be appalled -- and this includes India -- if we were to
pull out from Viet-Nam or if we were to settle for an
illusory peace that produced Hanoi control over 211 Viet-
Nam in short order.

In short, our effort in Viet-Nam in the past two years
has not only prevented the catastrophe that would other-
wise have unfolded but has laid a foundation for a progress
that now appears truly possible and of the greatest histor-
ical significance. 131/

Having disposed of what he saw as a misinterpretation of
Asian sentiment and U.S. interests there, Bundy now turned to the DPM's
attempt to minimize the U.S, commitment in Vietnam. He opposed the DPM
language because in his view it dealt too heavily with our military com-
mitment to get NVA off the South Vietnamese back, and not enough with
the equally important commitment, to assure that "the political board
in South Vietnam is not tilted to the advantage of the NLF." 132/ Bundy's
eonception of the U.S. commitment was twofold:

--To prevent any imposed political role for the NLF
in South Vietnamese political life, and specifically the
coalition demanded by point 3 of Hanoi's Four Points, or
indeed any NLF part in government or political life that
is not safe and acceptable voluntarily to the South Viet-
namese Government and people.

--JTo insist in our negotiating position that "regroupees,"
thet is, people originally native to South Viet-Nam who went
North in 1954 and returned from 1959 onward, should be expelled
as a matter of principle in the settlement. Alternatively,
such people could remain in South Viet-Nam if, but only if,
the South Vietnamese Government itself was prepared to receive
them back under a reconciliation concept, which would pro-
vide in essence that they. must be prepared to accept peaceful

- 60 i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
