Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ra buet
ie

0 AK
P SEGURITY ron! 71921
= he ;
The French Air Force in Indo China has been hampered by (1) a late delivery

of MDAP programned items and (2) a personnel ceiling imposed by Metropolitan
France, which is well below that required to do an efficient job. The types and
murcher of aircraft assigned are, in eneral, satisfactory for support of ground
actions. in the csse of airborne operations involving considerable number of
troops, additional airlift und personnel must be en in for temporary periods,
Since greater emphasis has been placed upon this theatre and a high supply priority
established, the supply picture has improved considerably in the past three (3)
mouths and shows every indication of being completely relieved in unother three
to six months. The personnel shortage, however, will remain and will continues
to adversely affect operations. The Prenen heave placed an arbitrary ceiling of
10,000 sir-force personnel for FIC and we believe this figure is about 5,000 short
of that needed for efficient operations of the total number of aircraft currently

signed and employed. A conservative estimate indicates that the french Air
Force could double its sortie rate with even a 33% incresse in personnel.

In addition to the military problem there are political, economic, ond
social considerations which must be solved. An extensive psychological warfare
program con and must be implemented. Also the French must chenge their tactical
thinking from defensive action to one of vigorous offense.

The Viet Minh launched their winter offensive in Tonkin on 15 October 1952,
taking the Trench by surprise not only as to time (three weeks earlier than anti-
cipated), but also as to the direction and objective. The enemy has consequently
retained ths initiative ever since. However, operation LORRAINE (combined sir
borne-ground maneuver), initiated by the Prehok Vv ietnanase tale on 10 November,
successfully cut off the Viet iiinh divisions from their Chinese supply routes and
overran sutstantiel forward supply dumps. On 26 November, tne Prec withdrew
their forces back into the perimeter in order to relesse severs1 Groups liobile
for acticn to counteract Viet Minh infiltration in the southern part of the
Delta. Am covvinced if the Frenen could have enained in the PHU DOAM orea and
extended their operation to YSU BAY, the Viet Minh reaction would of necessity
heve been to reverse the direction of their operations, erence the French in
that area to cleat their supply routes, with the result that a decisive action
would have resulted under conditions fovorable sa the eranahaVis baenes forces.

General de Linares id still hoping to mois a trip to Korox, but both he
and General Salen feel that he should not reece at this time.

Sincerely,

/sf © J 2 TRAPESLL
Brigadier Gsneral, USA

Chief
Generel J. Lawton Gollinrs
Chief of Staff United otates Army
Room 6-3-6034
Fentaron (3)
Washington 25, D. C. °
Pp
af

fees ?

,
oat

SEECAIS 'y iti Trier re atat

| 3
