Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF x Nea ah

WASHINGTON 25, D.C. SECURITY IMFO cg
28 August 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY oF eee:

Subject: The Navarre GoaeeRe for Operations
in Indochina

1. In a memorandum for you, dated 21 April 1953, subject:
"pronosed French Strategie Plan for the Successful Conclusion
oF tne Nar in Indochina, " the Joint Chiefs of Starf pointed

ut certain weaknesses in the LeTourneau-Allard plan, but
Polt that it was workable, During the visit of the U.S. Joint
Military Mission to Indochina, Lieutenant Ceneral Navarre sub-
mitted in writing to Lieutenant General O'Daniel, Chief of the i.
Mission, @ paper entitled "Principles for the Conduct of the E
Yar in Indochina" appended hereto, which appears to correct
vnese weaknesses and which presents a maried improvement in
French military thinking concerning operations in Indochina,

2. in his report Lieutenant General O'Daniel stated tnat,
ia his opinion, the new French command in Indochina will
accomplish under the Navarre concept the decisive defeat of
the Viet Minh by 1955 and that the addition of two or more
Yrencn Givisions from outside of Indochina would expedite
this defeat, Additions other than in divisional ore eaat eas
tion siculd be in error since it is the divisional tean, with
“i §s_ecr bat seas effectiveness, which is sorely needed in
inéochina, Lieutenant General O'Daniel further reported that
French alee sary leaders were most cooperative with the mission,
ne several asreements were accomplished to improve the effee-
eness of the proposed mi Litery operations, and that repeated
Eye baetons were extended to tne U. 5. mission to return in a
few months to witness the prozress the Prench will have mace

=

3. Based on past performances by the French, the Joint Chiefs
f Star? have reservatlor ns in predicting actual results which

an be expected pending additional proof by demonstration of
continued French support and py further French performance in
pee ees the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that
a basie requirenent for military Sucees 5S in indochina is one
of See political climate in that country which wili pro-

vide the incentive for natives to support the French and supply

as

OO

rarer Se A oes ae On
; SEC ay INFORMATION
ry : SecDef, Cont. Nowe ye aS)
