Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the reverse, which the French preferred. Elections would take place
under the supervision of local commissions, and the DRV preference was
for holding them country-wide and soon. By first removing the French,
and then by dealing directly with the non-communist Vietnamese on the
issues of control and supervision of the cease-fire, regroupment, and
general elections, the Viet Minh could legitimately expect a quick take-
over of power from the relatively weak Vietnamese National Army. As Dong
well knew, the relocation of French forces in the Tonkin Delta into a
tighter perimeter was having, and would continue to have, major reper-
cussions on Vietnamese army morale, 5/ Once the Prench: were persuaded
to withdraw, the VNA would undoubtedly collapse under Viet Minh military
pressure. Moreover, inasmuch as Dong's plan made no allowance for the
disarming, much less the regrouping, of indigenous forces on either side,
the Viet Minh would be militarily in a virtually unassailable. position
to control any general election that might be held (ary in fact, the
political process were ever to advance that far). Dong's proposal, then,
amounted to a request that the French abandon Vietnam.

e. The DRV Indicates Ambitions for Pathet Lao and Free Khmer

In the same speech, Dong evidenced that the DRV's ambitions
extended beyond Vietnam. Acting as spokesman for the Pathet Lao and
Free Khmer -- whose representatives had formally come under Viet Minh
direction with the announcement on 11 March 1951 of formation of a Viet
Minh-Free Khmer-Pathet Lao "National United Front" -- Dong argued that
these two movements enjoyed widespread popular support and controlled
most of the territory of their respective countries. With considerable
distortion of history (subsequently corrected by the Laotian and Cambodian
delegates), Dong sought to demonstrate that the Pathet Lao and Free Khmer
were de facto governments carrying out "democratic reforms" in the areas
their armies had "liberated." The negotiating objective was to gain the
status of lawful governments for the Pathet Lao and the Free Khmer. Dong
seemed strongly to imply that the DRV spoke not only for itself, but for
all the Indochinese peoples.

Dong included the Pathet Lao and Free Khmer in his settle-
ment plan. He demanded that France recognize the "sovereignty and inde-
pendence" of those movements no less than of the DRV:

"...the Peoples of Khmer and Pathet Lao have liberated
vast areas of their national territory. The governments of
resistance have exerted all their efforts in creating a
democratic power and in raising the living standards of the
population in liberated areas. That is why the government of
resistance of Khmer, as well as that of Pathet Lao enjoy the
support of and warm affection of the population in liberated
areas and they enjoy great prestige and influence among the
population of both countries.

C-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
