Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

_ZOP SECRET - Sensitive

which had reduced significantly its impact and effectiveness. Limita-
tions have been imposed on military operations in four ways, they
indicated:

a. The attacks on the enemy military targets have been
on such a prolonged, graduated basis that they enemy has ad-
justed psychologically, economically, and militarily, e.g.,
inured themselves to the difficulties and hardships accom-
panying the war, dispersed their logistic support system,
and developed alternate transport routes and a significant
air defense system.

b. Areas of sanctuary, containing important military
targets, have been afforded the enemy.

c. Covert operations in Cambodia and Laos have been
restricted.

d. Major importation of supplies into NVN by sea has
been permitted, F

The Chiefs indicated that they considered that U.S. objectives in
SEA could be achieved within this policy framework providing the level
of assistance the enemy received from his communist allies was not
significantly increased and there was no diminution of U.S. efforts.

However, the Chiefs concluded pessimistically that progress would
continue to be slow so long as present limitations on military operations
continued in effect and, further, at the present pace, termination of
NVN's military effort was not expected to occur in the near future.

The Joint Chiefs then listed a series of actions which could be
taken in the near future to increase pressures on NVN and accelerate
progress toward the achievement of U.S. objectives (see table, p. 22)
and recommended they be authorized to direct these actions.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that expansion of US
efforts entails some additional risk. They believe that as
a result of this expansion the likelihood of overt introduc-
tion of Soviet/Bloc/CPR combat forces into the war would be
remote. Failure to take additional action to shorten the
Southeast Asia conflict also entails risks as new and more
efficient weapons are provided to NVN by the Soviet Union
and as USSR/CPR support of the enemy increases. gh/

Information indicates that the President reviewed this paper and

stated that it was not what was desired, that it recommended actions
which had previously been denied and would not now be approved.

223 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
