Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

17S
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Department of State issued instructions to embassies
abroad to explain the strikes to foreign governments in counter-
infiltration terms. The guidance was to the effect that since the
Pause, the bombing of NVN had been carefully restricted to actual
routes of infiltration and supply; there had been no response what-
ever from Hanoi suggesting any willingness to engage in discussions
or move in any way toward peace; on the contrary, during the Pause
‘and since, NVN had continued to increase the infiltration of regular
NVN forces South, and to develop and enlarge supply routes; it was
relying more heavily on trucking and had sharply increased the importa-
tion and use of POL. The U.S. could no longer afford to overlook this
threat. Major POL storage sites in the vicinity of Hanoi and Haiphong
were military targets that needed to be attacked.

The targets, the guidance continued, were located away
from the centers of both cities. Strike forces had been instructed
to observe every precaution to confine the strikes to military targets
and there had been no change in the policy of not carrying out attacks
against civilian targets or population centers. There was no intention
of widening the war. The U.S. still desired to meet Hanoi for dis-
cussions without conditions or take any other steps which might lead
toward peace. 3/

The strikes made spectacular headlines everywhere. Hanoi
charged that U.S. planes had indiscriminately bombed and strafed resi-
dential and economic areas in the outskirts of Hanoi and Haiphong, and
called this "a new and extremely serious step." The USSR called it a
step toward further escalation. The UK, France, and several other
European countries expressed official disapproval. India expressed
"deep regret and sorrow," and Japan was understanding but warned that
there was a limit to its support of the bombing of NVN. Nevertheless,
according to the State Department's scoreboard, some 26 Free World
nations indicated either full approval or “understanding" of the strikes,
and 12 indicated disapproval. Press reaction to the attacks was short-
lived, however, and within a week or so they were accepted as just
another facet of the war. 4/

Meanwhile in the U.S., following a familiar pattern of the
Vietnam war, in which escalations of the air war served as preludes to
additional increments of combat troops, Secretary McNamara informed the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Service Secretaries and the Assistant Secre-
taries of Defense on July 2 that the latest revision of the troop deploy-
ment schedule had been approved as Program He 5/ The troop increases
were not major as program changes have gone in the Vietnam war, an increase
in authorized year-end strength from 383,500 approved in April to 391,000
and an increase of the final troop ceiling from 425,100 to 431,000. 6/
But McNamara had personally rewritten the draft memo submitted to him by
Systems Analysis inserting as its title, "Program #3." His handwritten

139 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
