i

o

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The summation was a somber conclusion to a resounding new emphasis
in American strategic thought. He believed that there was no great
probability of success lurking on any of the routes he proposed, only
a "mere possibility." The solution in his eyes, was to gird openly for
a longer war.

_.s.and in taking actions immediately which will in 12
to 18 months give clear evidence that the continuing costs
and risks to the American people are acceptably limited,
that the formila for success has been found, and that the
end of the war is merely a matter of time. 52/

The recommendations as a whole showed the influence of the studies
which had been done over the summer. The Jason studies on the anti-
infiltration barrier and the effects of U.S. bombing in the north were
apparently influential in the decisions to move ahead with the barrier
but to stabilize ROLLING THUNDER.

The increased emphasis on the pacification effort is apparently
a result of the feeling that, since it represented the heart of the prob-
lem in Vietnam, and the main force war was only contributory to it,
perhaps all that was needed in the main force war was to keep the enemy
off the back of the pacification effort in a strategic defensive, rather
than to destroy the enemy in a strategic offensive.

In @ sense, the memorandum was a clear "no" to MACV, CINCPAC and
JCS proposals for expanded bombing and major ground force increases, but
it was a negative with a difference. It provided alternatives. From
this time on, the judgment of the military as to how the war should be
fought and what was needed would be subject to question. New estimates
of what was needed in Vietnam would have to be calculated in light of new
objectives and new criteria for success, as well as new assumptions about
"winning." The warning had rung and unless dramatic outcomes measured
in time and political advantage could be promised, additional force
increases in the upward direction promised to be sticky indeed.

2. The JCS Reclamas

The JCS reaction to the DPM was predictably rapid -- and violent.
The Chiefs expressed their agreement with McNamara's basic. evaluation of
a long war, but disagreed on his guarded assessment of the military situ-
ation, which in their eyes had "improved substantially over the past year." 53/
They were especially concerned that the DPM did not take into account the
"adverse impact over time of continued bloody defeats on the morale of yc/
NVA forces and the determination of their political and military leaders." 5)/

However, they noted that the 470,000-man figure was "substantially
less" than earlier recommendations of COMUSMACV and CINCPAC, and they
wished to "reserve judgment" until they reviewed the revised programs
being prepared during the CINCPAC planning conference.

93 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
