Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

accordance with a policy which our Government has followed for the last

‘.. certainly since 1954, and even before then as I have indicated. We

are attempting to make all of the information available that we can,
consistent with our security needs in the area. So I feel that we ere

“being as frank as we can be, and I think what I have said to you is a

description of ovr activity there."

. eee a Ine

19. President Kennedy's Speech at University of California, March 23, 1962

Public Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, D. 265:

"The leaders of the Communist world are not only confronted by acute
internal problems in each Communist country -- the failure of agriculture,
the rising discontent of the youth and the intellectuals, the demands of
technical and managerial groups for status and security. They are con-
fronted in addition by profound divisions within the Communist world itself
-- divisions which have already shattered the image of communism as a uni-
versal system guaranteed to abolish all social and international conflicts,
the most valuable asset which the Communists had for many years.

"Wisdom requires the long view. And the long view shows us that the
revolution of national independence is a fundamental fact of our era. This
revolution cannot be stopped.

"As new nations emerge from the oblivion of centuries, their first as-
piration is to affirm their national identity. Their deepest hope is for
a world where, within a framework of international cooperation, every
country can solve its own problems according to its own traditions and
ideals * F

"It is in the interests of the pursuit of knowledge -- and it is in
our own national interest -~ that this revolution of national independence
succeed. For the Communists rest everything on the idea of a monolithic
world -- a world where all knowledge has a single pattern, all societies
move toward a single model, all problems have a single solution, and all
roads lead to a single destination.

"The pursuit of knowledge, on the other hand, rests everything on the
opposite idea -- on the idea of a world based on diversity, self-determina-
tion and freedom. And that is the kind of world to which we Americans, as
a nation, are committed by the principles on which this republic was formed,

"As men conduct the pursuit of knowledge, they create a world which
freely unites national diversity and international partnership. This emerg-
ing world is incompatible with the Communist conception of world order.

"Tt will irresistibly burst the bonds of Communist organization and
Commmist ideology. And diversity and independence, far from being opposed
to the American conception of world order, represent the very essence of
our vision of the future.

c-18
