Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Washington first authorized the use of ARC LIGHT B-52 forces for radar
photography over target areas in the Kontum and War Zone D regions on May 17.
151/ A month later, despite the misgivings of the Air Staff and the SAC
commander, the first B-52 bombing raid was authorized (ARC LIGHT I, June 18,
1965) attacking the War Zone D VC stronghold near Saigon. On July h and 7
further attacks were undertaken, and ARC LIGHT became a regular bombing
program in South Vietnam.

.As the weight of air attacks increased significantly in South Vietnam,
there was also some rise in the level of air strikes in the North. Combined
U.S.-VNAF combat sorties totaled about 3,600 in April, 4,000 in May, and
4,800 in June. USAF aircraft flew less than half the mission. But an
analysis by JCS Chairman Wheeler on 4 April and another by the CIA and the
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) early in July showed that the strikes had
not reduced appreciably North Vietnam's-ability to defend its homeland,
train its forces, and infiltrate men and supplies into South Vietnam and

Laos. 152/

But this rising level of attacks did not satisfy the Air Staff. At the
end of June, General McConnell continued to stress the need for more air
pressure on Hanoi, saying he was;

more convinced than ever that these [eiz] operations eannot be divorced
from and are the essential key to the eventual defeat of the Viet Cong.
In November 1964.../the/ JCS unanimously agreed that direct, decisive,
action against the DRV was needed immediately. This course of

action was not adopted and intelligence reports indicate that the cur-
rent air strike program, while inconveniencing the DRV had done little
to curtail or destroy their will and capability to support the insur-
gency, largely due to the restraints on the air strike program. In
fact, the restraints have provided the DRV with the incentive and
opportunity to strengthen both their offensive and defensive capabili-
ties.

So /the/ C/S USAF considers an intensified application of air power
against key industrial and military targets in North Vietnam essential
to the result desired. During the period of time required to intro-
duce more forces, any build-up of and support for the Viet Cong
offensive should be denied....Failing this, more serious difficulties
and casualties for U.S. and allied troops can be expected.

McConnell urged again that the Air Force be allowed to strike targets
in the 94 target list, as well as others. 153/

C. McNamara Reviews the Program

At the end of July, in response to a Presidential request,
Secretary McNamara undertook a review and evaluation of the bombing program

135) :: - TOP SECRET - Sensitive
