Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

- TOP SECRET - Sensitive

5. JCS Recommendations

On 4 November, the JCS forwarded to the Secretary of Defense
the results of the October PACOM Planning Conference with their "refine-
ments" added. The document, labeled JCSM 702-66, "Deployment of Forces
to Meet CY Requirements," held few surprises. The memorandum addressed
the crux of disagreement:

.---AS in past concepts, it goes beyond certain
restraints that have been placed on US operating forces
to date, such as those on the air campaign in North Viet-
nam, On cross border operations, on certain special opera-
tions, and on ground actions in the southern half of the
demilitarized zone. Further, this concept should be carried
out in its entirety, if achievement of US objectives is to
be accomplished in the shortest time and at the least cost
in men and materiel. The concept describes preparation for
operations that have not as yet been authorized, such as
mining ports, naval quarantine, spoiling attacks and raids
against the enemy in Cambodia and Laos, and certain special
operations. Such action will support intensified and
accelerated revolutionary development and nation building
programs. Since the force requirements are based on this
concept in its entirety, continued restraints and the
absence of authorization for recommended operations could
generate significantly different requirements for forces
and timing. 67/

In a sense, it embraced all of the right arguments (for "intensified
and accelerated revolutionary development and programs" and "shortest
time at the least cost," an overdetermined test) but unfortunately for
all. the wrong reasons. McNamara and Johnson were not politically and
militarily enchanted with a costly major force increase at that time,
nor with cross border and air operations which ran grave political risks.
The specter of early mobilization, while briefly raised by the JCS, was
temporarily erased by an ambiguous statement acknowledging that "capability
to meet these requirements cannot be developed without significant modifi-
cation to the criteria mentioned earlier: draw down latitude, rotation
policy, no call-up of reserves, maintenance of CONUS training base. Never-
theless, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that, while the program is less
than that desired, it will provide for the effective execution of the con-
cept of operations set forth." 68/

Finally, the Chiefs expressed their views about the piaster ceiling
»which Lodge and members of the Mission Council had found so attractive.

«e+e They consider that the requirement to reduce piaster
expenditures in the interest of combating inflation in South
Vietnam is important; however, this factor cannot be over-
riding in determining force levels because enemy actions could

100 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
