Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

carry our military actions against the North and how
long the campaign continues. At the sane time, the
pombing program offers the Soviet Union an opportunity
to play a role in bringing peace to Vietnam, by gaining
eredit for persuading us to terminate the program.
There is a chance that the scenario could spin out this
way: if so, the effect of the entire experience on the
US-Soviet detente could be a net plus. 63/

In addition, the Secretary continued, more countries than before
were "more interested in taking steps to bring the war to an end." The
net effect of this, however, was generally to increase the international
pressures on the U.S. to seek an accommodation, not Hanoi, so that it
was hardly an unmixed blessing.

Immediate gains and losses in the domestic and international polit-
ical arenas were less important, however, than the overall influence of
the bombing on the course of the war itself. Short-term political
penalties were not hard to bear, at home or abroad, if the bombing could
materially improve the prospects for a favorable outcome. This did not
necessarily mean that the bombing had to contribute to a military victory.
’ ROLLING THUNDER was begun at a time when the war was being lost and even
the minimum task of preventing an outright defeat was far from assured.
Almost any military contribution from the bombing could be viewed as a
boon.

It was not easy to assess the contribution of ROLLING THUNDER to
the war as @ whole. Decision-makers like Secretary McNamara received
regular monthly reports of measurable physical damage inflicted by the
strikes, together with a verbal description of less readily quantifi-
able economic, military and political effects within NVN, but it was
difficult to assess the significance of the results as reported or to
relate them to the progress of the war in the South. Reports of this
kind left it largely to the judgment or the imagination to decide what
the bombing was contributing to the achievement of overall U.S. objec-

tives.

CIA and DIA, in a joint monthly "Appraisal of the Bombing of North
Vietnam" which had been requested by the SecDef in August, attempted
to keep a running tabulation of the theoretical cost of repairing or
reconstructing damaged or destroyed facilities and equipment in NVI.
According to this, the first year of ROLLING THUNDER inflicted $63 million
worth of measurable damage, $36 million to "economic" targets like
bridges and transport equipment, and $27 million to "military" targets
like barracks and ammunition depots. 64/ In addition to this measurable
damage, the bombing was reported to have "disrupted" the production and
distribution of goods; created "severe" problems and “reduced capacity"
in all forms of transportation; created more severe problems" in man-
aging the economy; reduced production; caused "shortages" and "hardships";

esis TOP SECRET - Sensitive

——————t—‘(its~=s~S

