Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

The Consul at Saigon (Reed) to the Secretary of State
CONFIDENTIAL Sawox. December 6, 1946—4 p .m.
: [Received December 7—1L: 12 p. m.]
472. During visits Molar to high Freach officials latter almost ,
invariably stressed French desire arrive at peaceable settlement with
Vietnam. commenting dificulty dealing with Vietnam and that lat-
ter almost always tried put political aspect to even simplest economic
negotiations. and hinting France could and would go only so far in
the desired settlement. On interesting remark by Commissioner for
Finance was to effect France not working for political federation in
French Indo-China but rather build up economic federatien in whieh
all interests would be represented and protected—he pointed out in-
ability Vietnam understand purely economic questions and present
indifference to such nrimary matters as affect the national econoiiy.
He and another high official stressed willingness even desire for for-
eign capital investments in FIC if they were for constrnetive pur-
poses and not (mentioning Chinese specifcally) speculative. Com-
missioner for Finance, however, reconupending foreien capital should
be united with French knowledge conditions. Tn above connection
question is raised whether French would insist upon lareer share
canifal and/or maievity beard directors. Commissioner for Meonomie
Affsirs was optimistic for next year’s rice erap. estimatine at least
950,000 tans exnorteble surplus and if nolitical conditions impreve as
muchas 409.000. Prespect for rubber net so bright (perhaps 320,000-
35.000 tens) wiless Taher question solved and mentioned plan under
study imyport 5.000 Chinese eoolies but said FTC natives wonld nos-
sibly not react kindly to this, Mentioned also allocations of FIC
rice exports this vear have not heen taken un completely. Among
other noints Commissioner for Political Affpirs stated personnel all
mixed commissions envisaged by nredus r7rend? have heen yamed lit
still disenssion where they are to meet—tunderstand Mixed Military
Conmi'ssion has temporarily suspended its work in Tanoi until sitia-
tion is clarified. Almest all officials remarked in one form or another
Commmnis! character of reoime in north and one stated snecifically
Soviet mission here (mytel 451, November 217!) has already violated

* Not printed.
its undertaking not to eneage in political activities in FIC,

In commen! above and previons teleermins feel French would ae-
cept’ solution protecting interests but will only go so far (witness
present stiffer attifude) but hesitate believe Frepch world eno ee unon
fall sente military operations unless absolutely forced. Freneh sppear
to realize no leneer possible maintain clesed door here and non-lreneh
interests will have chance to participate in uneuestioned rich economic
possibilities. Pefore this can happen political situstion must be
settled and in deing this Cechin China anestion will be traning point—
still believe Frenel; will find it @iienle te save Cochin Chinn tnless
prepared to fight, for in choice between Vietnam and French the
Cochin Chinese will join former despite disike of Tonkinese and
fear of economic and political exploitation by them.

Reen

87
