Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Wie
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

3. POL - Strategic Failure

It was clear in retrospect that the POL strikes had been
a failure. Apart from the possibility of inconveniences, interruptions,
and local shortages of a temporary nature, there was no evidence that
NVN had at any time been pinched for POL. NVN's dependence on the
unloading facilities at Haiphong and large storage sites in the rest of
the country had been greatly overestimated. Bulk imports via ocean-
going tanker continued at Haiphong despite the great damage to POL docks
and storage there. Tankers merely stood offshore and unloaded into
barges and other shallow-draft boats, usually at night, and the POL
was transported to hundreds of concealed locations along internal water-
ways. More POL was also brought in already drummed, convenient for dispersed
storage and handling and virtually immune from interdiction. 19/

The difficulties of switching to a much less vulnerable
put perfectly workable storage and distribution system, not an unbearable
strain when the volume to be handled was not really very great, had also
been overestimated. Typically, also, NVN's adaptability and resourceful-
ness had been greatly underestimated. As early as the summer of 1965,
about six months after the initiation of ROLLING THUNDER, NVN had begun
to import more POL, build additional small, dispersed, underground tank
storage sites, and store more POL in drums along LOCs and at consumption
points. It had anticipated the strikes and taken out insurance against
them; by the time the strikes came, long after the decision had been
telegraphed by open speculation in the public media, NVN was in good
position to ride them out. Thus, by the end of 1966, after six months
of POL attacks, it was estimated that NVN still had about 26,000 metric
tons storage capacity in the large sites, about 30-40,000 tons capacity
in medium-sized dispersed sites, and about 28,000 tons capacity in smaller
tank and drum sites. 20/

One of the unanticipated results of the POL strikes, which
further offset their effectiveness, was the skillful way in which Ho Chi
Minh used them in his negotiations with the Soviets and Chinese to extract
larger commitments of economic, military and financial assistance from
them. Thus, on July 17 he made a major appeal to the Chinese based on
the American POL escalation. 21/ Since North Vietnam is essentially a
logistical funnel for supplies originating in the USSR and China, this
ancrease in their support as a direct result of the POL strikes must
also be discounted against whatever effect they may have had on hampering

North Vietnam's transportation.
The real and immediate failure of the FOL strikes was

reflected, however, in the undiminished flow of men and supplies down -
the Ho Chi Minh trail to the war in the South. In early July, the

ihe TOP SECRET - Sensitive
