Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Hanoi-Haiphong area and may have decided -- or could
shortly decide -= to introduce into North Viet Nam some
surface-to-surface missiles.

With respect to option C, I believe we should, while
keeping open the B option, concentrate our attacks to
the maximum in Route Packages 1 and 25 and, in conducting
Hanoi-Haiphong attacks, we should do so only when the targets
make sense. I do not expect dramatic results from increasing
the weight of attack in Route Packages 1 and 2; but I believe
we are wasting a good many pilots in the Hanoi-Haiphong area
without commensurate results. The major objectives of
maintaining the B option can be achieved at lower cost. 90/

Although he had endorsed a strike on the Hanoi power plant, he rejected
any attack on the air fields in a terse, one sentence final paragraph,

"Air field attacks are only appropriate to the kind of sustained operations
in the Hanoi-Haiphong area associated with option A."

Two important members of the Administration, McNaughton
and Rostow, had thus weighed in for confining the bombing to the panhandle
under some formula or other. On Monday, May 8, presumably before the
policy meeting, William Bundy circulated a draft memo of his own which
pulled the problem apart and assembled the pieces in a very different
way. Idke the others, Bundy's draft started from the assumption that
pombing decisions would be related to other decisions on the war for
which @ consensus appeared to exist: pressing ahead with pacification;
continued political progress in the South; and continued pressure on the
North. To Bundy's way of thinking there were four broad target categories
that could be combined into various bombing options:

1. “Concentration on supply routes." This would con-

prise attacks on supply routes in the southern "bottleneck"
areas of North Vietnam, from the 20th parallel south.

2. “Re-strikes." This would comprise attacks on targets
already hit, including unless otherwise stated sensitive targets
north of the 20th parallel and in and around Hanoi/Haiphong, which
were hit in the last three weeks.

3. “Additional sensitive targets." North of the 20th
parallel, there are additional sensitive targets that have
been on our recent lists, including Rolling Thunder 56.
Some are of lesser importance, some are clearly "extremely
sensitive” (category 4 below), but at least three -- the
Hanoi power station, the Red River bridge, and the Phuc Yen
airfield -- could be said to round out the April progran.
These three are the essential targets included in this

category 3.

37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
