{ss

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

apparent willingness to accept large casualties in offensive engagements
indicated the manpower shortage did not currently exist. Intelligence
estimates of PAVN's capability of intervening overtly in South Vietnam
across the Demilitarized Zone was that PAVN could do so with approximately
three divisions against moderate opposition. If PAVN were to try to intro-
duce units into South Vietnam covertly through the Laotian Corridor, it

is estimated he would be able to introduce 1 to 2 additional divisions by
the end of 1965. The estimate admitted that the purpose and role of PAVN
units were not certain and might well have changed since their initial
deployment. Perhaps Hanoi had wanted a PAVN force on the spot in the
eventuality that the Saigon government collapsed, and perhaps Hanoi wanted
to assure itself the VC would not collapse in the face of the US military
commitment, or, more likely, Hanoi may have wanted to assist the VC in
increasing the tempo of its campaign and in hastening a victory. At that
time, it appeared that there was no intention cf employing the PAVN units
as a division; rather, they would assist the recurrent VC strategy of
widespread harassment and terrorism punctuated with multi-battalion
spectaculars.

The manner in which the probable requirements for additional forces
were derived is of interest. The critical assumption was “that the VC/NVA
can mount simultaneous attacks in each GVN corps area not to exceed one
reinforced regimental (4 battalions) attack and one single battalion attack
at any given time." From this, a simple numerical calculation, based
upon the assumption that a 4 to 1 superiority would provide a high proba-
bility of victory, resulted in the requirement for Free World offensive
maneuver battalions. When added to the number needed for base defense,
the result was the total of required Free World battalions. If U.S. forces
were to be placed in all four Corps Tactical Zones, a total of 35 addi-
tional battalions would be needed to secure bases and gain the 4 to 1
advantage desired. If the U.S. effort were limited to the area north of
paigon, only 7 additional battalions would be needed. It would seem that
this requirement was very sensitive to rates of infiltration and recruit-
ment by the vc/IIVA, but very little analysis was, in fact, given to the
implications of the capabilities of the VC/NVA in this regard.

B. McNamara Goes to Saigon - A Decision on IT

1. Westmoreland Proposals

On 7 July 1965, Secretary McNamara cabled Westmoreland to lay
out the purpose of his visit to Saigon and some of the questions which
he would like to have answered.

The main purpose of our visit will be to receive from you.
your recommendations for the number of U.S. combat battalions,
artillery battalions, engineering battalions, helicopter con-
panies, tactical aircraft, and total military personnel to be

, 7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
