Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The next day, attention shifted to a ground anti-infiltration
program when General Westmoreland came in with his PRACTICE NINE Require-
ments Plan, the study of his manpower and logistics requirements to
implement the barrier plan outlined a month earlier. The cover memoran-
dum on the plan prepared by the JCS made a determined case against the
proposed time frame (a target date of 1 November 1967 had been set), and
argued for providing the additional forces from outside resources rather
than relying upon assignment of in-country forces already programmed for
use elsewhere in the 1967 Campaign Plan. 35/ In light of the anticipated
manpower draw-down within South Vietnam, the plan was relatively austere.

COMUSMACV was protecting plans already approved and rolling; accord-
ingly he considered his plan to be no more than "the optimum which /was/
reasonably attainable without an unacceptable impact upon the objectives
of the 1967 Combined Campaign Plan." 36/ ‘

MACV envisioned a strong point and obstacle system constructed on
the eastern portion of northern Quang Tri Province to impede infiltration
and to detect invasions. The plan visualized that the system of strong
points and obstacles would serve as a base for possible future expansion
of the system into the western portion of Quang Tri Province to the
Iaotian border; this expansion being contingent upon time, forces, mater-.
ial and security conditions. COMUSMACV also indicated a preference for
extension of the strong point/obstacle system into the Western Sector
instead of reliance on air delivered munitions and sensors.

His force requirement provided the excitement. In his words:

"To have an effective obstacle system across SVN,
south of the DMZ, would require a minimum additional force
of one division and one armored cavalry regiment." 37/

The concept of operations for employment of these forces contemplated
two operational areas, an eastern sector and a western sector. Force
availability and logistical limitations would permit operations initially
only in the eastern section with the exception of one area in the Western
portion, that near Khe Sanh. An Army brigade (or Marine RCT) and an ARVN
regimental force would construct and man the strong point obstacle system,
with artillery, air and NFG fires supporting along the entire trace. III
MAF would be prepared to reinforce threatened areas and provide depth to
the defense. Two Marine battalions (as a minimum) were earmarked for
positioning in the Dong Ha and Khe Sanh areas “until relieved." This
large additional troop requirement of nearly two division equivalents and
the basic COMUSMACV concept in the plan was to quickly reappear in a
CINCPAC message early in February, one which discussed the barrier and
infiltration in broader terms. 38

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
5)
