Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

governments by the countries of the world whose policies
support the development of genuine national independence in
former colonial areas...."

Formal French ratification of Vietnamese independence was announced on

2 February 1950; on the same date, President Truman approved U.S. recog-
nition for Bao Dai. French requests for aid in Indochina followed within
a few weeks. On May 8, 1950, the Secretary of State announced that:

"The United States Government convinced that neither
national independence nor democratic evolution exist in any
area dominated by Soviet imperialism, considers the situation
to be such as to warrant its according economic aid and mili-
tary equipment to the Associated States of Indochina and to
France in order to assist them in restoring stability and per-
mitting these states to pursue their peaceful and democratic
development."

The U.S. thereafter was deeply involved in the developing war. But
“it cannot be said that the extension of aid was a volte-face of U.S.
policy precipitated solely by the events of 1950. It appears rather as
the denouement of a cohesive progression of U.S. policy decisions stem-
ming from the 1945 determination that France should decide the political
future of Vietnamese nationalism. Neither the modest 0.5.5. aid to the
Viet Minh in 1945, nor the U.S. refusal to abet French recourse to arms
the same year, signaled U.S. backing of Ho Chi Minh.: To the contrary,
the U.S. was wary of Ho, apprehensive lest Paris'imperialism be suc-
ceeded by control from Moscow. Uncertainty characterized the U.S.
attitude toward Ho through 1948, but the U.S. incessantly pressured
France to accommodate "genuine" Vietnamese nationalism and independence.
In early 1950, both the apparent fruition of the Bao Dai solution, and
the patent alignment of the DRV with the USSR and Communist China, impelled
the U.S. to more direct intervention in Vietnam. (Tab 3)

T.A. DISCUSSION
Tab 1 - Indochina in U.S, Wartime Policy, 1941-1950
2 - U.S. Neutrality in the Franco-Viet Minh War, 1946-199

3 - Origins of the U.S. Involvement in Vietnam

A-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
