Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Let us look toward the past, at the time when you were
abroad, For eight or nine years, the Vietnamese people suf
fered many trials due to the war: They passed from French
domination to Japanese occupation, from revolution to resis-
tance, from the nationalist imposture behind which hid
communism to a pseudo-independence covering up for colonial-
ism; from terror to terror, from sacrifice to sacrifice --
in short, from promise to promise, until finally hope ended
in bitter disillusion,

Thus, when you were on the point of returning to the
country, the people as a whole entertained the hope that it
would find again under your guidance the peace that is neces~
sary to give meaning to existence, to reconstruct the de-
stroyed homes, put to the plow again the abandoned lands.
The people hoped no longer to be compelled to pay homage to
one regime in the morning and to another at night, not to
be the prey of the cruelties and oppression of one faction;
no longer to be treated as coolies; no longer to be at the
mercy of the monopolies; no longer to have to endure the
depredations of corrupt and despotic civil servants. In
one word, the people hoped to live in security at last,
under a regime which would give them a little bit of justice
and liberty. The whole people thought that you would be the
man of the situation and that you would implement its hopes.

That is the way it was when you returned. The Geneva
Accords of 1954 put an end to combat and to the devastations
of war, The French Expeditionary Corps was progressively
withdrawn, and total independence of South Viet Nam had
become a reality. Furthermore, the country had benefited
from moral encouragement and a substantial increase of
foreign aid from the free world. With so many favorable
political factors, in addition to the blessed geographic
conditions of a fertile and rich soil yielding agricultural,
forestry, and fishing surpluses, South Viet Nam should have
been able to begin a definitive victory in the historical
competition with the North, so as to carry out the will of
the people and to lead the country on the way to hope,
liberty, and happiness. Today, six years later, having
benefited from so many undeniable advantages, what has the
government been able to do? Where has it led South Viet Nam?
What parts of the popular aspirations have been implemented?

Let us try to draw an objective balance of the situation,
without flattery or false accusations, strictly following a
constructive line which you yourself have so often indicated,
in the hope that the government shall modify its policies so
as to extricate itself from a situation that is extremely

dangerous to the very existence of the nation.

35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
