Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

perseveringly, will certainly smash the U.S. imperialists’
scheme to seize our land and their lackeys' plot to sell
out our country. On the basis of the consolidation of
North Vietnam and its steady development in all fields, of
the broad and powerful development of the patriotic move-
ment in the South, and will the approval and support of the
peace loving people all over the world, our struggle for
national reunification will certainly be successful."

The following day the official press carried an editorial (also broad-
cast by Radio Hanoi in English) commenting on the communique:

"At present, the world and home situation has become
basically different from that of the past. It has been
developing in a way which is fully advantageous to our
people and very disadvantageous to the imperialists and
their lackeys. Our strength in all fields in the North, :
which is the firm base for the revolutionary struggle
in the South, has constantly been consolidated and
increased. The magnificently heroic struggle of the
southern people has constantly developed and their united
strength has broadened without a halt. Strength in all
fields of the socialist camp has grown majestically.

"On the basis of an unprecedently firm North Vietnam
and socialist camp, our compatriots in the south will
struggle resolutely and persistently against the cruel \
U.S.-Diem regime... :

"Our people, always cherishing peace, are determined

to struggle to compel the other side to carry out correctly
the Geneva agreements, to re-establish normal North-South

_ relations and to hold consultations on general elections to
reunify the country. However, our people are determined
not to give the imperialists and feudalists a free hand to
oppose our people's aspirations and to keep the southerners
in slavery. Our people are determined to struggle with their
traditional heroism by all necessary forms and measures so as
to achieve the goal of the revolution."

On 10 July 1959, the Belgian Communist publication Red Flag published
an article under Ho Chi Minh's by-line which reported that:

"We are building socialism in Viet-Nem, but we are
building it in only one part of the country, while in the
other part we still have to direct and bring to a close
middle-class democratic and anti-imperialist revolution." 1g2/

59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
