Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The second question is what the optimum recommenda-
tion for action should be if in fact a congressional
resolution is not recommended..... 102

There were six enclosures included for the consideration of those
attending the conference, The first was a memorandum on the subject
of "Elements of a Southeast Asia Policy That Does Not Include a Con-
gressional Resolution", The second was a Sullivan memorandum sum~-
marizing the current situation in South Vietnam. The third was a
memorandum by W. P. Bundy dated 12 June 1964 on "Probable Develop-
ments and [the/ Case for Congressional Resolution on Southeast Asia."
The fourth was a draft resolution on Southeast Asia for Congressional
approval, The fifth suggested basic themes to be employed in present-
ing the resolution to the Congress. The sixth and last consisted of
a long series of questions and answers regarding the resolution of the
public relations sort that it was thought should surround the effort.

The proposed "Elements of a Policy That Does Not Include a Con-
gressional Resolution” consisted largely of an elaboration of the
covert measures that were already either approved or nearing approval.
This included RECCE STRIKE and T-28 Operations all over Leos and
small-scale RECCE STRIKE Operations in North Vietnam after appropriate
provocation. Apparently the sequence of actions was thought of as
beginning with VNAF Operations in the Laotian corridor, followed by
limited air and sea deployments of U.S. forces toward Southeast Asia,
and still more limited troop movements in that general area. Military
actions were to be accompanied by political actions which would
maximize diplomatic support for Laos and maximize the support and :
visible presence of allies in Saigon. This last was explicitly stated
to be particularly desired by “higher authority." Diplomatic moves,
it was hoped, would also intensify support of Souvanna. In Vietnam,
the paper argued, we should emphasize the eritical province program,
strengthen the Country Team, shift the U.S. role from advice to direc-
tion, discourage emphatically any further coup plots, and give
energetic support to Khanh, In the U.S. there should be expanded
publicity for opposition to both aggressive adventure and withdrawal.
It is probably significant that the last words of this study were that
"this outline does not preclude a shift to a higher level of action,
if actions of other side should justify or require it. It does assume
that in the absence of such drastic action, defense of U.S. interests
is possible within these limits over the next six months.” 103/

The Sullivan memorandum warrants special attention because, al-
though nominally a report on the situation, it speculated on policy
and courses of action in a way very significant to the policy formu-
lation processes at this time. In discussing the role of morale as a
future consideration it approached a level of mysticism over a pathway
of dilettantism. It was stated that at Honolulu both Lodge and
Westmoreland had said the situation would remain in its current stale-
mate unless some "victory" were introduced. Westmoreland defined

83 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
