Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

long disorder could produce worthwhile result and whether he
considers compromise on status Cochinchina could possibly be
reached through negotiation.

"May say American people have welcomed attainments Indo-
chinese in efforts realize praiseworthy aspirations greater
autonomy in framework democratic institutions and it would
be regrettable should this interest and sympathy be imperilled
by any tendency Vietnam administration force issues by intran-
Sigence and violence.

"May inform Ho /U.S. Ambassador, Paris/ discussing situa-
tion French similar frankness....

"Avoid impression US Govt making formal intervention this
juncture. Publicity any kind would be unfortunate." 26/

In response to Under Secretary Acheson's telegram, the following
was reported to Washington on December 17, 1946 -- just before the out-
break of hostilities in Hanoi:

"After conversations with French and Vietnamese officials
and British, Chinese and US Consuls Hanoi Mr. Abbot Moffat,
who is at present in SEA, has developed views in which Consul
Saigon concurs along the following lines:

"The Vietnam Government is in control of a small Commu-
nist group possibly in indirect touch with Moscow and direct
touch with Yenan. A nationalist group is utilizing Communist
party techniques and discipline with which they are familiar.
The people are conservative landowners and attempts to com-
munize the country are secondary and would await successful
operation of a nationalist state. Apparently some leaders,
like Ho Chi Minh, consider collaboration with the French
essential; those like Giap (Vo Nguyen Giap, Minister of Na-
tional Defense) would avoid collaboration fearing French
domination but might not reject French influence and aid.
Nationalist sentiment runs deep among the Vietnamese and
does opposition to the French, and they might easily turn
against all whites. French influence is important not only
as an antidote to Soviet influence but to protect Vietnam
and SEA from future Chinese imperialism. Delay in achieving
a settlement will progressively diminish the possibility of
ultimate French influence.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
