Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

unhampered by the existing restrictions on sortie number, that CINCPAC
has recommended, the Chiefs urged the reduction of the size of the
sanctuaries arcund Hanoi, Haiphong and the China border. More impor-
tantly, the Chiefs requested authorization to eliminate the airfields
if required and permission for operational commanders "to deal with the
SAM threat, as required to prevent interference with planned air opera-
tions." 47/

The Chiefs acknowledged the likely adverse response to
this sharp escalation in the international community, but urged the
necessity of the proposed actions. In dealing with the anxieties about
Chinese communist entry into the war, they neatly turned the usual argu-
ment that China would enter the war in response to escalatory provocation
on its head by arguing that a greater likelihood was Chinese entry through
miscalculation.

The Joint Chiefs...believe that continued US restraint
may serve to increase rather than decrease the likelihood
of such intervention /Chinese/ by encouraging gradual
responses on the part of the Chinese Communists. This is
in addition to the probable interpretation of such restraint
as US vacillation by both the Commimist and Free World
leadership. 48/

The Chiefs spelled out their specific proposals in their concluding recom-
mendations:

a. The authorized area for offensive air operations
be expanded to include all of NVN less the area encompassed
by a ten-mile radius around Hanoi/Phue Yen Airfield, a
four-mile radius around Haiphong, and a twenty-mile China
buffer zone. Exceptions to permit selected strikes within
these restricted areas, in accordance with the air campaign
described herein, will be conducted only as authorized by
the Joint Chiefs....

b. Numerical sortie limitations on armed reconnais-
sance in NVN be removed.

e. No tactical restrictions or limitations be imposed
upon the execution of the specific air strikes.

d. The Joint Chiefs...be authorized to direct CINCPAC
to conduct the air campaign against the DRV as described

herein. 49
On the same day as the Chiefs' Memorandum, and perhaps in

reaction to it, John McNaughton set down what he termed "Some Observa-
tions about Bombing North Vietnam." 50/ It is not clear to whom the

33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
