Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Instead of seeing the most important things and acting
on them, instead of making on the spot investigations, of
looking for inspiration in the village and in the ricefield,
instead of informing themselves and winning the confidence of
the most humble people, in order to deprive the rebels of
their best weapon, the Norodom Palace clique has allowed itself
the luxury of administering 4 la francaise and of reigning
over a country where revolution is smouldering ...

"The press has not the right of criticism. To tell the
truth, it has become official, and the principal newspaper
in Saigon is at the disposition of the High Commissariat.
letters are censored. Propaganda seems to be issued just
to defend the High Commissariat. Such a regime cannot last,
unless we are to appear as people who are determined not
to keep their promises." 32/

The Parliamentary Mission described Saigon: “where
gambling, depravity, love of money and of power finish by corrupting the
morale and destroying will-power ..."; and the Vietnamese government:
"The Ministers /of the Bao Dai regime/ appear in the eyes of their com-
patriots to be French officials ..." The report did not hesitate to
blame the French for Vietnamese corruption:

"Tt is grave that after eight years of laisser-aller
and of anarchy, the presence in Indochina of a resident
Minister has not been able to put an end to these daily
scandals in the life in regard to the granting of
licenses, the transfer of piastres, war damages, or com--
mercial transactions. Even if our administration is not
entirely responsible for these abuses, it is deplorable that
one can affirm that it either ignores them or tolerates them.” 33/

Commenting on this report, an influential French editor
blamed the "naturel tendency of the military proconsulate to perpetuate
itself" and “certain French political groups who have found in the war
a principal source of their revenues ... through exchange operations,
supplies to the expeditionary corps and war damages ..." 34/ He con-
eluded that:

"The generally accepted theory is that the prolongation
of the war in Indochina is a fatality imposed by events, one
‘of those dramas in history which has no solution. The theory
of the skeptics is that the impotence or the errors of the men
responsible for our policy in Indochina have prevented us from
finding a way out of this catastrophic enterprise. The truth
is that the facts now known seem to add up to a lucid plan
worked out step by step to eliminate any possibility of
negotiation in Indochina in order to assure the prolongation
without limit of the hostilities and of the military occupa-
tion."

A-21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
