Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

However, in the next section of the Presidential draft memorandum,
the Working Group relieved MACV of this responsibility by sketching one
possible strategy (obviously the preferred one) which should be able to
be pursued "without substantially increasing our level of forces in South
Viet Nam, thus avoiding the adverse domestic and foreign consequences
sketched above." 52/

The strategy outlined in the memorandum was designed to attain the
initiative along the "demographic frontier." It consisted of the following:
Those forces currently in or near the heavily populated
areas along the coast should remain in place. Those forces
currently bordering on the demographic frontier*® should con-
tinue to operate from those positions, not on long search-and-
destroy missions, but in support of the frontier. Eight to
10 battalions from the DMZ areas would be redeployed and become
strategic research in I Corps; six battalions from the interior
of II Corps would be redeployed to Dien Binh province as a
strategic reserve for defense of provincial capitals in the
highlands. As security is restored in the previously neglected
populated areas of coastal Viet Nam, additional U.S, battalions
would move forward to the demographic frontier....

Based just beyond the populated areas, the forces on the
demographic frontiers would conduct spoiling raids, long-
range reconnaissance patrols and, when appropriate targets
are located, search-and-destroy operations into the enemy's
gone of movement in the unpopulated areas between the demo-
graphic and the political frontiers. They would be available
as a quick reaction force to support RVNAF when it was attacked
within the populated areas. Where RVNAF patrolling in the
populated areas is inadequate, U.S. forces would be in a posi-
tion to assist. 53/

The advantages of the "demographic strategy of population security"
were listed as follows:

1. It would become possible to keep the VC/NVA off
balance in their present zone of movement. This area is
now largely available to them for maneuver and massing, no
more than a day's march from any of the major cities north
of Saigon.

2, It would lengthen enemy LOC's from their sanctu-
aries in Laos and Cambodia. Base areas and LOC's within
SVN would be the subject of attack and disruption, without
extending the war to neighboring countries.

¥ this frontier runs along the eastern foothills of the Annamite chain,
fron Quang-Tri Province to Phan Thiet in Binh Thuen, cuts across SVN
along the northern edge of the Delta from Phuc Tuy to the Cambodian
Border in Tay Ninh. Garrisons would be established as at Bong Son

and An Khe. 38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
