Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

leave such political instability as to foreclose success in the war:

for the first time, it was recognized that the U.S. should be consider-
ing methods of honorably disengaging itself from an irretrievable situa-
tion, The other alternative, not fully appreciated until the year
following, was a much greater U.S. involvement in and assumption of
responsibility for the war. At this point, however, the negative
analysis of the impact of the political situation on the war effort was
not shared by McNamara, Taylor, Krulak, nor seemingly by Rusk,

But discussions were overtaken by events, On the following Monday,
September 2, the President, appearing on the initial broadcast of the
CBS Evening News, was interviewed by Walter Cronkite:

Mr. Cronkite. Mr, President, the only hot war we've got
running at the moment is of course the one in Viet-Nam, and
we have our difficulties here, quite obviously.

President Kennedy, JI don't think that unless 6 greater
effort is made by the Government to win populer support that
the war can be won out there. In the final analysis, it is
their war. They are the ones who have to win it or lose it.
We can help them, we can give them equipment, we can send
our men out there as advisers, but they have to win it --
the people of Viet-Nam -- against the Commimists, We are
prepared to continue to assist them, but I don't think
thet the war can be won unless the people support the
effort, and, in my opinion, in the last two months the
Government has gotten out of touch with the people.

The repressions against the Buddhists, we felt,
were very unwise, Now all we can do is to make it very
clear that we don't think this is the way to win. It is :
my hope that this will become increasingly obvious to
the Government, that they will take steps to try to
bring back popular support for this very essential struggle.

Mr, Cronkite. Do you think this Government has time
to regain the support of the people?

President Kennedy. I do. With changes in policy and
perhaps with personnel, I think it can, If it doesn't
make those changes, I would think that the chances of
winning it would not be very good. 69/

Confronted by the necessity of public comment, the President had spoken
bola@ly and forthrightly. The President's call for changes of policy and
personnel patently conveyed the message that the Buddhist repressions
must end, and the Nhus must go. Later in the same interview, however,
the President had said, ".. . I don't agree with those who say we
should withdraw, That would be a great mistake." 70/ As Hilsman sum-
marized it later, =i

23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
