Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

was broken, it could lead to a very serious decision. I wonder, Mr.
President, now that the cease-fire has been broken, if efforts should
fail to re-establish it, would it cause a re-examination on the part
of the United States towards its policy there?

“THE PRESIDENT: Well, we are concerned about the break in the
cease-fire. As you know, the State Department, the Acting Secretary of
State, and the Assistant Secretary of State, met today with Ambassador
Dobrynin, this afternoon. We have already indicated to one of the co-
chairmen, the British government, our great concern about it. Our am-
bassador in Moscow met with the foreign secretary of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Gromyko.

"We do believe, and have said from the beginning, that the negotia-
tions should move much more quickly than they have. The longer this
rather frayed cease-fire continues, the more chance we will have of the
kind of incidents we have had in the past few days. That is why we were
hopeful, after the meetings at Geneva last summer and fall, that the
negotiations between the parties involved would take place last fall,
and we could organize a government, rather than trying to continue to
hold lines which in some cases are exposed, and which are subject to this
kind of pressure. So that has been our view.

"So that has been our view, and the longer it goes on, and the longer
there is not an agreement on a government, the longer some groups stand
out from these kinds of conversations, then the more hazardous the situa-
tion becomes.

"Now, on the particular incident, it is a clear breach of the cease-
fire. We have indicated and we hope that the Soviet Union, which is
committed to a policy based on the statement at Vienna, in regard to Laos,
we are hopeful that we can bring about a restoration of the cease-fire.
But we have got to use the time to try to move ahead in our political
negotiations. .

"I agree it is a very hazardous course, but introducing American
forces is the other one -- let's not think there is some great third
course. That also is a hazardous course and we want to attempt to see
if we can work out a peaceful solution, which has been our object for
many months. I believe that these negotiations snould take place quickly.
This is not a satisfactory situation today.”

a oe

22, White House Statement of the President, May 15, 1962, Public Papers
of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1962, Dp. 396:
"“Pollowing joint consideration by the governments of the United

States and Thailand of the situation in Southeast Asia, the Royal Thai

Government has invited, and I have today. ordered, additional elements of
the United States military forces, both ground and air, to proceed to

C-20
