Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

co-ordination upon unwilling governments, and we were equally
determined that our emphasis would be on types of aid that
would appeal to the masses of the population and not on aid
that, while economically more sophisticated, would be less
readily understood. Ours was a political program that worked
with the people and it would obviously have lost most of its
effectiveness if it had been reduced to a role of French-
protected anonymity ... [The program was/ greatly handicapped
and its beneficial psychological results were largely negated
because the United States at the same time was pursuing a
program of [military/ support to the French ... on balance, we
came to be looked upon more as a supporter of colonialism than
as a friend of the new nation.” 4h/

In 1965, Edmund Gullion, who was also very close to the Bao
Dai problem, took this retrospect:

"We really should have pushed the French right after the
Elysee agreements of March, 1949. We did not consider the
exchange of letters carefully enough at the time. It was
understandable. We obviously felt it was going to be a
continuing process, and we hoped to be able to have some
influence over it. But then we got involved in Korea, and
since the French were in trouble in Indochina, we pulled
our punches... The French could have said unequivocally, as
we did with regard to the Philippines, that in such-and-such
a number of years Vietnam would be totally free, and that it
could thereupon join the French Union or stay out, as it
desired... An evolutionary solution was the obyious one, and
it should have been confronted openly and honestly without al11
the impossible, protracted preliminary negotiations involving
efforts to bring the three Associated States together, to get
them to agree among each other, and with France, separately
and collectively. The French, in arguing against any kind of
bilateral agreements, claimed that their attempt at federation
in Indochina was like our effort to build some sort of federated
system in Europe. But their involvement and interest in Indo-
china was obviously different, and they used the formula they
devised to avoid any real agreement on Vietnam. The problem
grew more complex as the military and political aspects of the
situation became unavoidably tied together, and the Korean
War, of course, complicated it further. From the outset, the
French sought to regard the war in Korea and the war in Indo-
china as related parts of one big fight against Communism,
but it wasn't that simple. Actually, what the Korean War did
do was make it more difficult for us to urge an evolutionary
settlement in Vietnam. By 1951, it may have been too late for us
to do anything about this, but we could still have tried much
harder than we did. The trowble was the world by then had begun
to close in on us. The E.D.C. formula in Europe was being
rejected by the French, just as in 1965 they were rejecting the

A-29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
