Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This situation is thus critical, but is not hopeless. The
Vietnamese Government, with American aid, has increased its
capabilities to fight its attackers, and provides a base upon
which the necessary additional effort can be founded to defeat
the Communist attack. Should the Communist effort increase,
either directly or as a result of a collapse of Laos, additional
measures beyond those proposed herein would be necessary.

In short, the situation in South Vietnam has reached the
point where, at least for the time being, primary emphasis
should be placed on providing a solution to the internal se-
eurity problem.

The US Objective: To create a viable and increasingly demo-
eratic society in South Vietnam and to prevent Communist domina-
tion of the country.

Concept of Operations: To initiate on an accelerated basis,
a series of mutually supporting actions of a military, political
economic, psychological and covert character designed to achieve
this objective. In so doing, it is intended to use, and where
appropriate extend, expedite or build upon the existing US and
Government of Vietnam (GVN) programs already underway in South
Vietnam. There is neither the time available nor any sound .
justification for "starting from scratch." Rather the need is
to focus the US effort in South Vietnam on the immediate internal
security problem; to infuse it with a sense of urgency and a dedi-
cation to the overall US objective; to achieve, through coopera-
tive inter-departmental support both in the field and in Washington,
the operational flexibility needed to apply the available US assets
in a manner best calculated to achieve our objective in Vietnam;
and, finally, to impress on our friends, the Vietnamese, and on our
foes, the Viet Cong, that come what may, the US intends to win this
battle.

The program that followed this strongly worded introduction was very
modest, not merely compared to current US involvement, but to the effort
the US undertook following the Taylor Mission in the fall. The program is
essentially simply a moderate acceleration of the CIP program approved in
January, with a great deal of stress on vigor, enthusiasm, and strong
leadership in carrying out the program.

In particular, the program proposes no increase in the Vietnamese
army, and only a moderate (in hindsight, inconsequential) increase in the
size of our MAAG mission. The main military measures were for the US to
provide financial support for the 20,000-man increase in the RVNAF and to
provide support for the full complement of counter-insurgency auxiliary
forces (Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps) planned by Diem. Both were

or TOP SECRET - Sensitive
