Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The U.S. is not well informed on how the Lao Dong leaders
decided which to pursue of the several policy courses open to them,
but there is evidence that the developing of consensus took several
turnings. There appeared to be at first a move led by Ho and Giap
toward strengthening DRV ties with the Soviets, crowned with some
immediate success. On 28 February 1957 the UN General Assembly
recommended to the Security Council that South Vietnam (and South
Korea) be admitted to the UN. 164/ In early May, Diem paid a state
visit to the U.S., where he received assurances of continued strong
U.S. support. 165/ Whatever its reasons, the Soviet thereupon took a
position against the admission to the UN of South Vietnam, and on
20 May 1957, Marshal Kliment EB. Voroshilov, President of the Praesidium
of the Supreme Soviet, arrived in Hanoi for a state visit billed in
DRV newspapers as a "most important event." 166/ It then appears
that Truong Chinh and other Sinophile leaders pressed hard for
orientation toward Peking. Amid evidence of haste and confusion, Ho
left the country to visit East Europe in July, 1957, returning after
stops in Moscow and Peking on 30 August 1957. Ho was in Moscow in
July when Khrushchev expelled Malenkov, Molotov, and Kaganovich --
the anti-party group -- from the Praesidium of the CPSU, and probably
gained some first hand insight into the ideas of the new leaders. 167/
In his absence, the DRV signed a new economic agreement with the CPR,
and on his return, he appears to have been plunged into a power
struggle of some proportions. Ho Chi Minh issued a statement on
2 September 1957 that the government of South Vietnam had to respect
the desire of its people for reunification, and averred that his
European trip demonstrated a "complete unity of views" with fraternal
countries and that the trip had "splendid" results. 168/ Also in
September, Le Duan was formally admitted to the Politburo. In late
October or early November, Ho left, somewhat mysteriously, for Moscow.
Although Hanoi newspapers had announced a six week long fete in honor
of the 40th anniversary of Russia's October Revolution, the actual
celebrations were limited to a few, simple events, and handled low-key
by the DRV and its press. Such speeches as were recorded had distinct.
Maoist overtones. Truong Chinh re-emerged from eclipse as the principal
party spokesman, while Giap dropped from sight. Ie Duan also went to
Moscow, but returned without Ho Chi Minh. Then, in‘ late December, amid
rumors that Ho and Giap were dead, both reappeared in Hanoi, and resumed
their former position. 169/ In 1958, the Soviets replaced the CPR as
the DRV's prime aid donor.

In subsequent years, Iao Dong Party historians identified
the meetings in Moscow in the fall of 1957 as one of the pivotal events
in the modern history of Vietnam. Western commentators have focused
on Khrushchev's speech in which he pointed out that capitelism was
doomed but that, "the only correct path in the development of inter-
national relations is a policy of peaceful coexistence . . . We work
from the premise that wars are not necessary to advance socialism. . ." 170/

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
