4G

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Approximately 40 minutes after first contact and after firing a warning
Shot, Morton and Edwards opened fire, both scoring hits. Subsequently,

on two separate occasions after the target images had disappeared from

the radar, new contacts appeared and were fired on at a range of approxi-
mately 8,500 yards, hits again being indicated for both vessels. In all,
Morton fired 56 five-inch and 128 three-inch rounds; Edwards fired 152
five-inch and 6 three-inch rounds. There were no rounds or torpedoes —
reported coming from the radar contacts. 98/ ater on the 18th (Washington
time), President Johnson suspended the DE SOTO Patrols; they were not to

be resumed until February 1965.

In the aftermath of the third destroyer incident in the Tonkin
Gulf, covert GVN maritime operations were not resumed until October.
President Johnson authorized reactivation of this program on the ith, under
very tight controls. 99/ The proposed schedule of maritime operations had
to be submitted at the beginning of each month for approval. Each opera-
tion was approved in advance by OSD (Mr. Vance), State (Mr. L. Thompson
or Mr. Forrestal) and the White House (Mr. McGeorge Bundy). 100/ During
October, these included two probes, an attempted junk capture, and ship-
to-shore bombardment of North Vietnamese radar sites. later, they included
underwater demolition team assaults on bridges along coastal LOC's. Unlike
the DE SOTO Patrols, these unacknowledged operations continued throughout
the year,

Actions in Laos. Operations in the Iaotian Panhandle ueOh BEEtS
with fewer unpredictable developments. On 11 September, representatives
of the U.S. missions in Taos, Thailand and Vietnam met in Saigon to dis-
cuss implementation of the NSAM 314 provisions for cross-border air and
ground operations. Regarding air operations, they agreed that if their
primary objective was military in nature, "sharp, heavy" and concentrated
attacks would be needed and that U.S. and/or VNAF/FARMGATE forces would be
reduired. If their impact was intended to be primarily psychological
(presumably affecting both communists and the GVN), they believed that the
operations could be more widely spaced, relying primarily on Laotian T-28s
with some U.S. strikes on harder targets. In view of Souvanna Phouma 's
reported opposition to VNAR strikes in the Panhandle, the representatives
conceded that the slower paced operation with RLAF aircraft offered the
best course. 101/ However, they saw a joint Lao, Thai, RVN and U.S.

. Operation as particularly desirable, were it not for the time required

to arrange it. As one means of symbolizing four power support for the

“Operation, they recommended that the Thai Government be eo regarding

use of the Korat base by participating U.S. aircraft. 102

Regarding cross-border ground operations, the representatives
agreed that the southern and central Panhandle offered terrain and targets
consistent with the available GVN assets. Although it was recognized that
eccompanying U.S. advisors might be necessary to assure the success of the
operations, the planners acceded to Vientiane's objections that such a

28 ; TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
< aur DEVARE = sensitive
