Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

explanation is that MACV was under a new commander, General Westmoreland,

who was more willing to expand the advisory effort and less inclined to

cite the potential disadvantages of a larger American presence. General
Harkins had already returned to the United States to receive the Distinguished
Service Medal in a ceremony on 24 June and, at the request of President
Johnson, remained in the U.S. until he retired. 118

At any rate, it was a new COMUSMACV who cabled on 25 June his pro-
posals for the buildup discussed at the beginning of the month in Honolulu.
In sum, he asked for 900 additional advisors for battalions and districts,
Suggested @ small increase at province level, and noted that "significant"
numbers of personnel would be needed for administrative and logistical
support of the new advisors. He also suggested, in the emphasized portion
of the message quoted below, that many of the district advisory teams
could complete their work and be moved to new areas for pacification
within a year:

1. Augmentation of current US Advisory detachments at
the battalion level and further extension of the advisory
effort at the district level are necessary now to influence
the successful planning and execution of the National Pacif-
ication Plan. These additions to the currently authorized
advisory detachments have been discussed with and agreed to by
GVN, and will enable us to place advisors at the lowest level,
as needed, in order to insure that all possible actions are
properly coordinated....Extensiion of US Advisory effort to the
districts as an initial step toward intensifying the Pacification
Program at the lowest level is essential. This will insure
supervision and coordination in the employment of paramilitary
forces and a general reinforcement of the pacification effort
at district level. Initially, teams of two (2) officers and
three (3) enlisted men (one (1) of whom will be a radio opera-
tor) be placed in the forty-five (45) districts of the eight
(8) priority provinces. In ten of these districts, and ‘in
three (3) districts of two other provinces, a limited effort
is now being made by district teams of one (1) officer and one
(1) enlisted man; these teams will be increased to full strength
district teams. In the provinces outside of the eight top
priority provinces teams will be placed in another sixty-eight
(68) districts. Starting 1 Jan 65 it is envisaged that an
additional fifty (50) teams can be placed, and that by 1 Jul 65
teams from the original districts can be placed into the
remaining districts in SVN. This extension of US Advisory
effort to the district level mist be conducted on a phased
basis with actual composition and employment as determined by
COMUSMACV. ‘Two (2) officers and three (3) enlisted men are
considered as average team strengths for planning purposes....

50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
