Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

We concur in Secretary McNamra's analysis of the
effects of the ROLLING THUNDER program, its potential
for reducing the flow of essential supplies, and his
judgment on the marginal inutility of added sorties against
lines of communication. We endorse his argument on
stabilizing the level of sorties. We do not agree, how-
ever, with the implied judgment that changes in the bombing
program could not be effective. We continue to judge that
a bombing program directed both against closing the port
of Haiphong and continuously cutting the rail lines to
China could have a significant impact. 63/

Carver also opposed any halt or de-escalation of the bombing to start
negotiations, arguing that we could either pursue negotiations or try

to build up the GVN but we could not do both. His preference was to build
in the South. Hence, a bombing halt or pause was not required. As to

a reduction, he argued that,

Shifting the air effort from the northeast quadrant
+o the infiltration areas in Laos and southern North Vietnam
would be quite unproductive. Such a course of action would
not induce Hanoi to negotiate (since it would still involve
pombing in the north) and would probably have little effect
in changing present international attitudes. Furthermore,
a concentration of sorties against the low-yield and elusive
targets along the infiltration routes in the southern end of
North Vietnam and in Laos would not appreciably diminish North
Vietnam's ability to maintain the supply of its forces in
South Vietnam. 64/

As for the anti-infiltration barrier, neither the Chiefs
nor Carver had a great deal of comment. The Chiefs reiterated their
reservations with respect to resource diversion but endorsed the barrier
concept in principle. Carver somewhat pessimistically observed that,

In order to achieve the objectives set for the barrier
in our view it must be extended well westward into Laos.
Air interdiction of the routes in Laos unsupplemented by
ground action will not effectively check infiltration. 65/

To no one's surprise, therefore, McNamara proceeded with the barrier
project in all haste, presumably with the President's blessing.

169 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
