Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

FW 795.00/8-753: Confidential File

[French Embassy] |
Washington, July 31,1953

AIDE-MEMOIRE

1. The armistice in Korea having come into force,
it seems indispensable to the French Government to re-
view at this time the exchange of views at Washington
between the Foreign Mintster, Mr. Foster Dulies and
Lord Salisbury, concerning the raising of the question
of Indochina in the course of political negotiations
which are to follow the armistice.

The Foreigfn Minister on July 14 submitted to
his American end British colleagues a memorandum on
this question. The present aide-memoire is intended
to spell out certain points contained in that memorandum.

2. The interdependence of the two cnnflicts in
Korea and Indochina is acknowledged, since it has
been emphasized at different times in the conmuniques
of the three Fowers, and has been affirmed by President
Eisenhower and Mr. Foster Dulles. As is recalled in
the Declaration of the Sixteen Powers, it will oe in-
conceivable that the armistice in Korea might result
in preventing the establishment or the maintenance of
peace in another part of Asia, in increasing the sup-
port given by China to the Viet Minh, and in aiding
in this manner the spread of Communism. It will be
incomprehensible if anything is overlooked in trying
to extend to Southesst Asia, and in particular to
indochina, the benefits of the relaxation that it is
hoped will arise from the end of hostilities in Korea.

The question thus arises of knowing by what
means and with what immediate objectives one might
associate a solution of the Indochina conflict with
the settlement of problems with which the Political
Conference, culled for by the armistice agreement, will
deal.

3. With regard to the means, Article 60 of the
armistice agreement, by means of the phrase "etc." does
not rule out, in principle, that the Indochina question
(a) might be formally included, as such, in the agenda
of the Conference, (b) or might be taken up in the

109
