Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. C. 2. SINO-SOVIET OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGY

1. USSR and China Motivated by Different Objectives
a. Atmosphere at Geneva is Different from Panmunjom

During the Korean War, the initial communist move toward
negotiations came at a time of fairly clear-cut military stalemate. Dis-
cussions at Panmunjom extended over two years while UN and communist armies
fought over small parcels of strategically valuable terrain. In Indochina,
to the contrary, the first communist indications of willingness to nego-
tiate came in September 1953 (from both Peking and Moscow), while the
Viet Minh were preparing for the "general counteroffensive," and with
the French Union forces constricting their defensive perimeter and des-
perately seeking to prevent large-scale desertions by the Vietnamese.
Moreover, a final settlement was reached after only two months of bargain-
ing. The reasons for this unexpectedly rapid and compromise settlement
lie in Moscow and Peking. For reasons that were either the same or com-
plementary, these two communist powers created an atmosphere for serious
negotiations.

b.- Soviet Objectives

Unlike the Chinese, the Soviet Union was never explicit about
its motivations for working toward a settlement. Nevertheless, there
are strong grounds for believing that the Soviets had these goals in view:
(1) averting a major war crisis over Indochina that would stimulate Western
unity, provide the U.S. with support previously lacking for "united action,"
and conceivably force Moscow to help defend the Chinese; (2) reducing the
prospects for successful passage of the European Defense Community in the
French National Assembly; (3) seizing the opportunity to create a communist-
controlled enclave in Vietnam which could then be expanded into a new com-
munist state.

(1) USSR Seeks to Avert a Major International Crisis

On the first point, the Soviets were surely aware that
the United States probably would be prepared, under certain conditions,
to consider active involvement in the war. Newspaper reports of the time
added both credence and uncertainty to American plans for "united action."
The Soviets during this period were caught up, moreover, in a full-fledged
policy debate over the import of Eisenhower's defense program for Soviet
national security. When the debate was resolved sometime in April 1951,
apparently First Secretary Khrushchev's perception of the continued dan-
ger of a new world war that might be touched off by a reckless American
nuclear strike won out over the relative optimism of Premier Malenkov.
Specifically, Moscow probably reasoned that a failure to settle at Geneva
would lead to U.S. involvement and escalation in Indochina, that at one
point there might be another direct clash between American and. Chinese
forces, and that the Soviet Union therefore would be called upon to come
to the aid of its Chinese ally.

c-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
