Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET: = SENSTTIVE

in August, 1960) that: 103/

"In 1954 the Communist army of North Vietnam could have.
crossed the seventeenth parallel and walked into Saigon
standing up. Today if they tried it, they would have one
nasty fight on their hands."

The Army of Vietnam (ARVN) assumed American forms, with divisions,

corps headquarters, and general staffs -- an "upgrading" which appealed
to the Vietnamese military, denied such pretensions under the French,
Although the MAAG continued to recognize a requirement for assisting
ARVN capabilities against guerrillas and infiltrators, the primary
efforts of American and Vietnamese soldiers alike were directed toward
improving conventional defense capability through 1960, and ARVN became
mechanized, ponderous, road bound, and preoccupied with its supply and
staffing functions. 104/ ' Indeed, MAAG viewed ARVN "pacification" duties
as an obstruction to progress. The internal security of the nation
devolved upon two paramilitary forces: the Self-Defense Corps, and the
Civil Guard, U.S. aid for both of which comprised an unhappy chapter in
the U.S.-GVN relationship. The Self-Defense Corps (SDC) was created in
April, 1956, as a village militia, and received U.S. assistance from the
MAAG in the form of funds and shoulder arms. Training of the SDC was
Jeft to ARVN. The Civil Guard (cG) was established in April 1955, as a
paramilitary force which was to operate under the province chiefs.
American aid to the CG was provided through a group from Michigan State
University under contract to both the U.S. and the GVN. Its organization,
equipment, and utilization became a point of controversy almost at once:
the Public Administration Division of the Michigan State group conceived
or the CG as a rural constabulary, recruited locally, trained and equipped
for police operations; Diem preferred a more military organization,
heavier in equipment, and organized for sustained combat. In terms of
later U.S. concepts of "counterinsurgency," the early judgment of the
MSU group was probably correct: a rural constabulary close to the people
might have helped Diem meet the early challenges of the insurgency,
especially in the field of intelligence. However, with MAAG support,
Diem's ideas prevailed, and the CG became a force competitive to ARVN.

In actuality both the SDC and the CG were quite ineffective in providing
internal security. Their arms, equipment and training were rudimentary.
ARVN used its training responsibilities for them as a dumping ground for
inept officers. Through them, however, U.S. small arms were channeled
into the countryside, there to augment the arsenals of dissidents. And
the behavior of these ill-prepared levies probably did little to enhance
GVN rapport with the farmers. 105/

From the outset, the American aid program for South Vietnam
was overwhelmingly military. There was doubtless, always a limit to how
much economic and other non-military aid the GVN needed, wanted, or
could efficiently absorb, but primary emphasis in U.S. aid programs from
the outset was placed upon security -- with Diem's agreement, as his
1956 letter (supra.) indicates. In the first few years, about 70% of
all U.S. aid was for the security establishment. 106/ About 80% of

27 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
