Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Underlying the State Department's concerns over the impact of
U.S. Vietnam policy on the rest of Southeast Asia were current develop-
ments in the communist world. For one thing, the Soviet Union had
re-entered Southeast Asian polities in an active way, after a period of
nearly three years of diligent detachment. Following a reported Soviet
pledge in lovember to increase economic end military aid to North Viet-
nem, the Administration held a series of conversations in December with
representatives of the new Soviet regime. During at least one of these
=-- in addition to exchanging the now standard respective lines about who
violated the Geneva Accords -- Secretary Rusk stressed the seriousness
of the situation created by Hanoi's end Peking's policies, implying
strongly thet we would remain in South Vietnem until those policies
changed or hed resulted in "a real scrap." Soviet Foreign Minister
Gromyko replied that if the United States felt so strongly about improv-
ing the situation in Vietnam, it should be willing to attend an inter-
national conference to discuss Laos and Vietnam. . However, he would not
agree with Rusk's request for assurances that Laos would be represented
by Souvanna Phouma. 230/

Within a few weeks of this conversation, Mr. Gromyko sent
assurances to the DRV thet the Soviet Union would support it in the
face of aggressive actions by the United States. Further, he expressed
the official Soviet view that it was the duty of #11 participants in the
Geneva agreements to take the steps necessary to frustrate U.S. militery
plans to extend the war in Indo-China. This note, sent on 30 December,
was made public in a renewed call on January for a conference on Laos,
to be convened without preconditions On 17 January, Pravda carried an
authoritative statement warning that "the provocations of the armed
forces of the United States and their Saigon puopets against North Viet-
nem" carried dangers of "Jerge armed conflict," and citing naval attacks
on the DRV coast and U.S. air attacks in Laos as examples. On the 22nd,
in letters to both Hanoi and Peking, Gromyko reiterated the Soviet pledge
to aid North Vietnam in resisting any U.S. military action. 231/

In addition to renewed Soviet activity in Southeast Asia, that
of Communist Chine also appeared ominous. Fenned by Sukarno's abrupt
withdrawal of Indonesia's participation in the U.N., some U.S. officials
voiced concern over the develonment of a "Peking-Jakarta axis" to promote
revolution in Asia. Yorth Vietnam, together with North Korea, were seen
as naturel allies who Might join in to form an international grouping
exerting an attraction on other Asian states to counter that of the U.N.
Peking was viewed as the instigator and prime benefactor of such a group-
ing. 232/

Complementing the State Department policy assessments, were those
in OSD. For example, in early January, Assistant Secretary McNaughton
regarded U.S. stakes in South Vietnam as: (1) to hold onto "buffer real
estete" near Thailend and Malaysia and (2) to maintain our national

78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
