Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Except for 2f, 2g, 2i, 2j, and the escalatory military actions of
paragraph 3 that had been suggested previously by the JCS, this memo-
randum outlined much of the program that was to be adopted by the SecDef
in March after his trip to Saigon, and approved by the President
thereafter as NSAM 288.

8. The Fact Finding Mission and NSAM 288

Before the Secretary left for Vietnam, trip books were prepared
for his use and the use of others in his official party. In this trip
was an appraisal of the Vietnam situation, dated 3 March 1961, prepared
especially for this occasion by the normally optimistic SACSA. It
began with this summary:

The RVN faces the most critical situation in
its nearly 10 years of existence. This situation
is the result of political erosion, culminating
in two changes of government within three months
and in a nationwide revamping of civil administra-
tors, and of the continued growth of a well-organi-
zed, dedicated Commmist insurgency movement. 52/

This was followed by a political discussion wherein there was
mention of the chronic shortage of competent administrators. The govern-
ment was credited with superior material resources, but, "unless it is
able to demonstrate the willpower and political skill to bring this
potential to bear, the political and security situation Will continue
to deteriorate." It was considered hopeful that Khanh seemed determined
to provide dynamic leadership, but it was observed that he would have to
overcome "widespread public and official apathy, lack of confidence,
low morale, and factionalism among key personnel."

Khanh's efforts and attributes were catalogued approvingly, but
this only lead to a concluding paragraph as follows:

Encouraging as Khanh's performance has been
to date, he has not been able to counteract the
overall trend of events in South Vietnam. In
many of the most critical provinces, pacification
programs remain at a virtual standstill and
there is an evident lack of urgency and clear
direction. 53/

This was followed by a section entitled "Military and Security
Situation." ~ This section contained an interesting judgment, which
represented a reversal. by SACSA of opinions expressed six months or
more before concerning the time when the situation hed begun to
deteriorate.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

x6)
