Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

villagers who had worked with the government, and left things
much worse than they had been before...An attempt to make a
big immediate show of pacification needs to be warned against,
because of the Washington pressure to do just that. A large
element of the U.S. Mission was called home a month or so

ago. And in effect, these men were commanded to produce a
plan for making a show as soon as possible.

"Fortunately, they had the courage to point out that
the cart was being put before the horse once again. For-
tunately, Ambassador Lodge is well aware of the dangers of
putting the cart before the horse. The pressure for some-
thing showy may continue, but it is likely to be resisted.

"If so, the pressure will not be altogether useless,
The Vietnamese and the Americans here are getting ready
for pacification on a big scale and in an imaginative way,
partly because of that pressure.

"Tt is vital to have everything in readiness to do the
job of pacification as soon as favorable circumstances
arise. But it is also vital to bear in mind that really
favorable circumstances cannot arise until the enemy's
backbone of regular units is at last very close to the
breaking point, if not actually beginning to break."

EDITORIAL: Christian Science Monitor, February 11:

"Tf Saigon and Washington fight South Vietnam's economic
and social war as vigorously as they fight its military war,
the Communist thrust against that country will fail. Yet
this is the biggest 'if' of the war. Over and over lip-
service has been paid to the inescapeble need of winning
over the peasantry. But time and again this has come to
naught.

"We are cautiously encouraged by the latest steps
being taken. The strong emphasis laid in the Honolulu
Declaration on civie reforms is a commitment in the right
direction. The sending of Vice-President Humphrey to study
South Vietnamese reform programs on the spot is an even
stronger earnest of America's intention not to let this
program slip back into another do-nothing doldrum,..”

52 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
