Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

“POP SECRET - Sensitive

For January, the JCS urged that several air missions be added
to the kind of operations already approved. Included were two VNAF air
strikes, using unmarked aircraft and U.S. air escort for returning
surface craft. 170/ However, both of these items were disapproved;
only the air operations in support of psychological and resupply opera~
tions gained acceptance. 171/ Apparently there was little additional
MAROPS activity during January, 1965; the normal documentary sources
include very little for this period.

b. Armed Reconnaissance in Laos. Like the maritime operations,
armed reconnaissance in Laos was, in some respects, a continuation of
operations that had been underway for some time. At least, U.S. aircraft
had been operating over Laos since the previous May, performing recon-
naissance functions and providing armed escort for these and (since
October) the RLAF strike missions. Of course, armed escort was carried
out under strict rules of engagement that permitted attacking ground
targets only in response to hostile fire. Given the operational code
YAUKER TEAM, these carrier and lend-based missions had been following
a constant pattern for several months. This had included roughly four
daylight reconnaissance flights in the Plaine des Jarres - Route 7 area
every two weeks, and during a like period, approximately ten reconnaissance
flights in the Panhandle, and two night-reconnaissance flights along
Route 7. Complementing these efforts were those of the RLAF, whose T-23's
harassed the Pathet Lao, gave tactical air support to Royal Leotian Army
units, interdicted Route 7 and the Panhandle, and performed armed route
reconnaissance in Central Laos. During the period 1 October-30 December,
there were a total of 724 7-28 sorties in the Panhandle alone. These had
already precipitated several complaints from the DRV, alleging U.S.-
sponsored air attacks on North Vietnemese territory. 172/

The intended U.S. policy was discussed with Premier Souvanna
Phouma on 10 December by the new U.S. Ambassador to Laos, William
Sullivan. He reported that Souvanna "fully supports the U.S. pressures
program and is prepared to cooperate in full." The Premier particularly
wanted interdiction of Routes 7, 8, and 12, but he insisted on making no
public admission thet U.S. aircraft had taken on new missions in Laos.
The Administretion had indicated to the Vientiane Embassy a few days
earlier that it wished the RLAF to intensify its strike program also,
particularly “in the Corridor areas and close to the DRV border." 173/

In the meantime, the JCS developed an air strike program to
complement the YANKER TEAM operation in accordance with current guidance,
and had instructed CICPAC to be prepared to carry it out. The program
included missions against targets of opportunity along particuler portions
of Route 8 and Routes 121 and 12. It also included secondary targets for
each mission that included barracks areas and military strong points.

The second mission was to be flown not earlier than three days following
the first. 174/ The progrem was briefed at a 12 December meeting of the

61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
