Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

DEPARTMENTAL DISCUSSIONS WITH GENERAL de. LATTRE de PASSTGNY :
MINUTES OF SECOND ‘MEETING, WASH LiINGTON

*

MR MERCHANT said that thé Department of State would
re-emphasize to the Defense Department the political amd
strategic problems faced by Indochina and would make
every effort to insure that the question of equipment
would receive proper attention at the Pentagon. It
was the will of the Department of ,State, he said, to
speed the delivery of military equipment to Indochina,
and the urgency of the situation was well understood by
Mr. Young and Mr. Bingham, both of whom were most anxious
to talk with the General's staff about the specific
items needed. MR. MERCHANT inquired whether the General
could estimate how long a period would elapse before the
first new division of the National army would reach the

- front, thus permitting French units to be released for =
European duty. GENERAL de LATTRE answered that three
units of Vietnamese troops should reach the Tonkin
front next month.

ECA Assistance

MR. MERCHANT asked whether the General wished to
comment on the US economic aid program in Indochina,
adding that he should realize that the U.S. felt that
it was to the common interest of both countries to give
such aid directly to the governments of the three
Associated States and to keep local Frencn leaders in-
formed of current economic arrangements. MR. MERCHANT
understood, however, that the General felt that economic \
aid could be used more directly for military purposes.
GENERAL de LATTRE replied that when he had first arrived
in Indochina in December, 1950, he had felt that the
aid program was not working out on a satisfactory basis. |
According to the General, the problem was caused by the
fact that a number of young men with a "missionary
zeal" were dispensing economic aid with the result that is
there was a feeling on the part of some that they were \
using this aid to extend American influence. The results

loopy held in S/S-R+
TOP SECRET.

“56

eel
