Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

built the Viet Cong's political apparatus.

"The earlier arrivals had had at least five years of
indoctrination and training in North Viet Nam, or else-
where in the Communist bloc, before departing on their
southern missions . . ." 132/

The monopoly of Viet Cong leadership by the infiltrators
from the North became evident after 1960. By 1965, they were clearly
dominant. For example, while southerners still controlled the Viet
Cong of the Mekong Delta, in the provinces just north of Saigon --

Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, Binh Hoa, and Phuoc Tuy especially -- regroupees
and northerners had assumed most of the principal command positions.

A document captured in January 1966 listed 47 VC officials attending a
top-level party meeting for that region, of whom 30 had infiltrated
from 1961 through 1965. Seven of these, all holding high posts in the
regional command, were North Vietnamese. 133/ U.S. intelligence has
estimated that one-third of the infiltrators from 1962 through 1964

were military officers or political leaders. 134/ A high-level defector
from the VC 165A Regiment, charged with the Saigon region, stated that in 1965
8 of its 20 top officers were infiltrators. Other prisoners and ralliers
have provided evidence that from one-quarter to one-third of Viet Cong
officers in Liberation Army units were infiltrated from the North. At
Viet Cong central headquarters in Tay Ninh -- Central Office for South
Vietnam (COSVN) -- Senior General Nguyen Chi Thanh of the NVA and Major
General Tran Van Tra of the NVA and the Lao Dong Central Committee, his
deputy, both North Vietnamese, held the top positions in the Communist
Party Secretariat, under which there was a Military Affairs Committee
heavily weighted with North Vietnamese military Officers. By 1966 it
was clear that in the northern provinces of South Vietnam, the NVA was
in direct command. General Hoang Van Thai, 4 deputy chief of staff

of the NVA, and Major General Chu Huy Man, a member of the Lao Dong
Central Committee, commanded all vc/NVA operations there. 135/

4. The Communist Party. U.S. intelligence has been relatively
well assured that throughout the years since 1945 the Communist Party of
North Vietnam -- in its several guises -- has remained active in South
Vietnam and in control of the Communist Party there. Public statements
by Ho, by Truong Chinh, and other DRV leaders confirmed intelligence
collected by the French that the Party went underground upon its formal
disestablishment in 1945, but stayed operational and united throughout
Vietnam. 136/ The Party publicly and privately took credit for organizing
and leading the Viet Minh in the years 1945 to 1951, and upon the DRV's
legalizing the Lao Dong Party in 1951, openly identified the latter |
with both the Indochinese Communist Party pre-1945, and the covert Party
of the years thereafter. By 1954, the Party seems to have asserted
itself in virtually all of the Viet Minh's sprawling undertakings.

Party members held the key positions in the Front, both in the North and
in the South, and Party cadre served as the chain of command for both

operational intelligence and decisions. 137/ The Viet Minh administered
South Vietnam as two "interzones" or regions (see map), and established

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
