Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

MOP SHORET - Sensitive

advisory effort, the provision of advisory teams at the district (svb-
sector) level. Thirteen teams of one officer and one noncommissioned
officer had been deployed in critical districts, it will be recalled,

in March 1964. The final August decisions to make 553 district advisors
available in RVN by 1 December was designed to provide for a larger team
(2 officers, 3 EM) for each of 113 of the total 239 districts. The MACV
plan, then, was to provide U.S, military advisors only to about one-half
of the total number of districts in RVI.

By the end of CY 196) all 113 teams were actually deployed. Their
total strength at that time was 532 as against the authorized total
strength of 565.* By January 1965 the mmiber of district advisors
assigned exceeded the number authorized. These teams were deployed, it
will be recalled, in the expectation that by some time in 1965 a sub-
stantial number of them would have worked themselves out of a job and
be available for reassignment to new areas. This expectation was, to
put it mildly, not validated by events.

In February 1965, roughly a month after the limited expansion to
district advisors had been completed, the Khanh government was replaced
by the Quat regime. Over a year of U.S. effort to bring about political
stability within the GVN seemed to have been fruitlessly wasted. The
U.S. began the sustained bombing campaign against North Vietnam, ROLLING
THUNDER, on 26 February. Shortly thereafter, two Marine Battalion Landing
Teams (BLI's) were landed at Da Nang for air base security. These measures
presaged & growing U.S. material commitment; the trend was heightened by
ARVN's performance later in the spring of 1965.

During May and June ARVN suffered a series of near catastrophic
defeats that were instrumental in deciding the Johnson Administration to
act on General Westmoreland's recommendation for a greatly expanded U.S.
ground combat role in the war. On 11 May, the Viet Cong attacked and
overran Song Be, the capital of Phuoc Long Province, and a U.S. advisory
compound in the city with more than a regiment of troops. Both the U.S,
and Vietnamese took heavy casualties. Before the end of the month, a VC

force of undetermined size ambushed and decimated the ARVN 5ist Regiment near

the small outpost of Ba Gia a few kilometers west of Quang Ngai City in
I Corps. The ARVN commander in the area immediately rushed reinforcements
to the battle scene only to have them become victims of @ second ambush.
The battle dragged on for several days, but ended in a total defeat for
ARVN. ‘Two battalions were completely decimated, but more importantly, the
ARVN senior commanders on the scene had displayed tactical stupidity and
cowardice. With a crisis of confidence in leadership clearly developing

* The discrepancy between the 553 additional authorization and the total
district advisor authorization of 565 is accounted for by the transfer
of some of the spaces involved in the initial experimental program at
district level. 565 is the correct total -~ 113 teams of 5 men each.

5D TOP SECRET - Sensitive
