Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Manpower for such an establishment was available,
although in poor crop years, diversion was necessary. But equipment
was in short supply, and extensive training was in order. Most mili-
tary equipment and supplies had to be imported, as DRV industry was
incapable of more than small scale production of rudimentary small arms,
small arms ammunition, and simple impedimenta, such as uniforms. 76/
Accordingly, virtually from the moment of its independence, the DRV
sought and obtained military materiel from abroad, risking being caught
at contravention of Article 17 of the Geneva Agreement to build a large
modernized land army of 10-14 divisions. Tt/

b. Solidarity with the USSR and CPR

But military assistance and economic aid were conditioned
on the guid pro quo of DRV identification with and support for the "Com-
munist Bloc.” The price of Bloc support had been high; it included sacri-
ficing French cooperation after Geneva. 78/ In subordinating its interests
to those of the USSR and CPR at Geneva, the DRV impaired its own negotiating
strength. Thereafter, similar subordination obstructed its attempts to
achieve reunification. It was with France that the DRV had contracted to
hold elections on reunification, and it tried after 1954 to pursue a policy
calculated to encourage France's honoring its Geneva commitments. More-
over, the DRV, short of human and material capital, wished to maintain
access to French economic resources. Pham Van Dong assured the French in
January, 1955, that the DRY:

".++.Sincerely desires to establish economic relations
with France for reasons which are both political and economic....
That does not prevent us from establishing relations with friendly
countries like China, but we are used to working with the French
and can continue to do so on a basis of equality and reciprocity." 79/

But Paris was faced, as Pham put it, with a choice between Washington and
Hanoi, though he assured the French that "the unity of Viet Nam will be
achieved in any case, with France or against France." The French opted for
withdrawal in 1956: the price of protracted intimacy with a solidly Bloc
nation proved too high for France, both in its internal politics and in

the Western alliance. 80/

For the DRV, solidarity with the Bloc entailed costs
beyond French cooperation, for by the test of deeds, neither the Soviets
nor the Chinese firmly supported its quest for reunification. It was the
DRV's fate that the historically invincible monolith with which it cast
its fortunes in 1950 was, by 1957, definitely disintegrating. Soviet
policy vis a vis Vietnam had always been subordinated to its European
interests. This was evident as early as 1945, when the success of Ho
and the ICP were accorded less importance than success of the French

26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
