Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to be developed with great care. There would still be another meeting with
the President on the matter, on 6 May, before McNamara departed for the
trip that would take him to Saigon (after Bonn). McNamara would take up
issues with Lodge upon his arrival there. But before the 6 May meeting
with the President, would Lodge please answer seven questions as a contri-
bution to the Washington consideration of the issue.

The questions raised bythe Secretary and the answers provided later
by the Embassy follow:

1. What were Khanh's motivations? Does he believe that mobiliza-
tion makes sense only as a preparation for military action against
North Vietnam? Reply: Khanh as professional soldier thinks in terms
of victory. Not a matter of pique. Honestly seeking 4 means of
putting country on war footing.

@. Is there a trace of despair in Khanh's remarks? Does he think
he can win without attacking north? Reply: No. f

3. Previously Khanh told McNamara it would be necessary to con-
solidate a base in South Vietnam for attacking North Vietnam.
Previous couterguerrilla experience in Greece, Malaya, and Korea
Supports this judgment. Reply: Khanh does not want to move regard-
less of progress in the South.

4, Khanh's talk of evacuating seems fantastic. Reply: Agree.
Khanh*s concern was an ability to administer the city if attacked.
(This referred to Khanh's discussion of evacuating the city.)

2+ Were Khanh's talks of warning to Hanoi and Cambodia and
action against the French integral parts of mobilization? Reply:
Yes. But he should have evidence against French nationals.

6. How to interpret Khanh's remarks about U.S. "Army Corps?"
Reply: loose talk. This reaction came after (Lodge's) discouraging
reply about the possibility of the U.S. bringing in large numbers of
forces.

{- Was the GVN capable of administering limited mobilization?
Reply: Question is a puzzler. However, some such thing might be a
way Of overcoming "business as usual." 8l/

The response to Khanh's proposal that came out of the 6 May meeting
was that the Secretary of Defense was to tell Khanh, when he was in
Saigon, that the U.S. did "not intend to provide military support nor
undertake the military objective of rolling back Communist control in
North Vietnam.” 85/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

69
