Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

war; but the nearest precedents are Eastern Furopean takeovers after
1945, rather than guerrilla war cases.

d) Converting the bargaining pressure generated by the guer-
rilla forces into a partial victory by splitting the country: Laos.
Also, in a sense, North Viet-Nam in 1954 and the Irish Rebellion after
the First World War.

3. If we succeed in blocking these four routes to victory, dis-
couraging the Communist force in the South, and making the continuance
of the war sufficiently costly to the North there is no reason we
cannot win as clear a victory in South Viet-Nam as in Greece, Malaya,
and the Philippines. Unless political morale in Saigon collapses and
the ARVN tends to break up, case c), the most realistic hope of the VC,
should be avoidable. This danger argues for more rather than less
pressure on the North, while conducting the battle in the South in
such a way as to make VC hopes of military and political progress wane.

4, The objective of the exercise is to convince Hanoi that its
bargaining position is being reduced with the passage of time; for,
even in the worst case for Hanoi, it wants some bargaining position
(rather than simply dropping the war ) to get U.S. forces radically
reduced in South Viet-Nam and to get some minimum face-saving formula
for the VC.

5- I believe Hanoi-understands its dilemma well. As of early ©
February it saw a good chance of a quite clean victory via route ce).
It now is staring at quite clear-cut defeat, with the rising U.S.
strength and GVN morale in the South and rising costs in the North.
That readjustment in prospects is painful; and they won't, in my view,
accept its consequences unless they are convinced time has ceased to
be their friend, despite the full use of their assets on the ground
in South Viet-Nam, in political warfare around the world, and in
diplomacy.

6. Their last and best hope will be, of course, that if they
end the war and get us out, the political, social, and economic situa-
tion in South Viet-nam-will deteriorate in such a way as to permit
Communist political takeover, with or without a revival of guerrilla
warfare. It is in this phase that we will have to consolidate, with
the South Vietnamese, a victory that is nearer our grasp than we
(but not Hanoi) may think.

Rostow had Jong been a strong bombing advocate, and an outspoken

proponent of air attack on elements of the North Vietnamese industrial tar-
get system. As early as April 1, 149/ he had expressed a conviction that
Hanoi attaches a high premium to the maintenance of its industrial estab-
lishment and that the optimum U.S. bombing objective should be not the

132 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
