Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Fy

The most important problems are reflected in the belief of the rural
Vietnamese that the GVN will not stay long when it comes into an area but
the VC will; the vc will punish cooperation with the GVN; the GVN is indif-
ferent to the people's welfare; the low-level GVN officials are tools of
the local rich; and the GVN is excessively corrupt from top to bottom.

Success in changing these beliefs, and in pacification, depends on
the interrelated functions of providing physical security, destroying the
VC organization and presence, motivating the villager to cooperate, and
establishing responsive local government.

Physical security must come first and is the essential prerequisite
to a successful revolutionary development effort. The security must be
permanent or it is meaningless to the villager, and it must be established
by a well organized “clear and hold" operation continued long enough to
really clear the area and conducted by competent military forces who have

been trained to show respect for the villager and his problems. So far
this prerequisite haus been absent. In almost no area designated for paci-
fication in recent years have ARVN forces actually "cleared and held" to
@ point where cadre teams could have stayed overnight in hamlets and sur-
vived, let alone accomplished their missions. VC units of company and
even battalion Size, too large for local defenses, have remained in oper-=
ation, a

Now that the threat of a Communist large-unit military victory has
been eliminated, we must allocate far more attention and a significant
portion of the regular military forces (at least helf of the ARVN) to
providing permanently secure areas in which Revolutionary Development (RD)
teams, police, and civilian administrators can root out the VC infrastruc-
ture and establish the CVN presence. This has been our task all along. It
is still our task. The war cannot come to a successful end until we have
found a way to succeed in this task.

Assignment of ARVN to Revolutionary Development Role, The increasingly
unsatisfactory performance of ARVN in combat operations is reflected in U.S,
Army advisory reports and in ARVN and U.S. operational statistics, During
the January-Septenber period for which data are available, U.S. field
advisors rated combat effectiveness as unsatisfactory or marginal in up to
32h of all ARVN combat battalions, Over 115,700 SVN military versannel
(19%) deserted in 1965, and desertions in 1966 through October were at
the annual rate of 130,000, 21% of the regular, regional, popular and ClpG
forces. The poor ARVN performance also shows in the operational statistics,
ARVN made contact in only 46% of its large-scale operations against a U.S.
contact rate of 904. Similar actions for small unit actions are not
readily available, :

116 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
