Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

\
to ensure that the vital 5th and 7th Divisions would be away from Saigon.
Don demanded to know what the U.S. attitude was toward a coup. Conein
reiterated the Washington guidance. Apparently relieved, Don asked
Conein to assure Lodge that Khuong was not a member of the coup committee
and would be punished. He indicated that the generals had avoided con-
tacting Lodge directly at a party on October 18 because of the presence
of members of Harkins’ staff. Conein then asked for proof of the existence
of the coup group and its plan. Don said that if they could meet the
following day, he would give Conein, HYES ONLY for Lodge, the political
organization plan,

In a subseguent conversation with Harkins on the matter, Lodge
reported that Harkins confirmed his demarche to Don on October 22, and
after they had reviewed CAP 74228, said he had misunderstood the policy
and hoped he had not upset any delicate arrangements. 37/ Harkins added
that he would inform Don that his previous statements did not reflect
U.S. Government policy.

By Harkins' account, he had not violated Washington's guidance in
his conversation with Don. 38/ He was merely trying to discourage
Vietnamese officers from approaching U.S. counterparts about coup plots
which only detracted from the war effort. Furthermore, Don had et no
time mentioned coup planning to him. He concluded by commenting about
the renewed plotting by the generals that:

Though I am not trying to thwart a change in goverment,
I think we should take a good hard look at the group's pro-
posals to see if we think it would be capable of increasing
the effectiveness of the military effort. There are so
many coup groups making noises that unless elements of all
are included I'm afraid there will be a continuous effort to
upset whoever gains control for sometime out and this to me
will interfere with the war effort. 39/

This incident once again highlighted the differing outlooks of the
Ambassador and MACV and underscored the lack of close coordination
between them. Unfortunately, it did not lead to any improvement in
the situation. The close identification of Harkins with Diem made the
Vietnamese generals mistrust him. Lodge, responsive to their great
sensitivity about security, tended to restrict information about the
contacts and coup plans to himself.

In response to this contact by Don, Washington reflected mainly
concern that he might be acting as an agent of the palace to lead us
down the garden path. 4o/ As he hed indicated, Don contacted Conein
on the morning of the 2th, but not with the promised plans. 41/ He
reported that the previous evening Harkins had spoken to him, correcting
his earlier statements about the nondesirability of a change of govern-
ment. Don further said he had a scheduled meeting with Lodge that

hy TOP SECRET - Sensitive
