Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"T do not belisve that the United States can be either lured or
frightened into appeasement. I believe that in taking the position of
opposing aggression by force, I am taking the only position which is
‘ consistent with the vital interests of the United States, and, indeed
with the peace of the world.

"Some misguided persons have said that Quemoy is nothing to be-
come excited about. They said the same about South Korea--about Viet
Nam, about Lebanon.

“Now I assure you that no American boy will be asked by me to
fight just for Quemoy. But those who make up our armed forces--and
IT believe the American people as a whole--do stand ready to defend the
principle that armed force shall not be used for aggressive purposes.

"Upon observance of that principle depends a lasting and just
peace. It is that same principle that protects the Western Pacific
free world positions es well as the security of our honeland. If we
are not ready to defend this principle, then indeed tragedy after
tragedy would befall us. :

"But there is a far better way than resort to force to settle
these differences, and there is some hope that such a better way may
be followed.

"That is the way of negotiation.

"That way is open and prepared because in 1955 arrangements were
made between the United States and the Chinese Communists that an
Ambassador on each side would be authorized to discuss at Geneva cer-
tain problems of common concern. These included the matter of release
of American civilians imprisoned in Communist China, and such questions
as the renunciation of force in the Formosa area. . There have been 73
meetings since August 1955.

"When our Ambassador, who was conducting these negotiations, was
recently transferred to another post, we named as successor Mr. Beam, our
Ambassador to Poland. The Chinese Communists were notified accordingly,
the latter part of July, but there was no response.

"The Secretary of Stete, in his September fourth ‘statement, referred
to these. Geneva negotiations. Two days later, Mr. Chou En-lai, the Pre-
mier of the Peopies' Republic of China, proposed that these talks should
be resumed ‘in the interests of peace.’ This was followed up on September
eighth by Mr. Mao Tse-tung, the Chairman of the Peoples’ Republic of
China. We promptly welcomed ‘this prospect and instructed our Ambassador
at Warsaw to be ready inmiedietely to resume these talks. We expect that
the talks will begin upon the return to Warsaw of the Chinese Communist
Ambassador who has been in Peiping.

.

B-}0
