Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Jasper Wilson, briefed senior officials on the creation of "rings of
steel" which would grow outward from Saigon until the area from the
Cambodian border to the South China Sea was secure. Then, according

to the plen, Hop Tac would move into the Delta and North. Colonel
Wilson ordered his staff to produce a phased plan in which the area (Map 1)°
to be pacified was divided into four circles around Saigon. Each ring
was to be pacified in four months, according to the original plan, which
never had any chance of success. But Wilson, under great pressure from
his superiors, ordered the plan produced, got his Vietnamese counterparts
to translate it, and issued it. The kickoff date for Hop Tac was to be
September 12, 1964: the operation, a sweep into the VC-controlled pine-
apple groves just west and southwest of the city of Saigon -- the VC

base nearest to the city, which had not been entered by the GVN since
the last outpost had been abandoned in 1960.

The operation began on schedule, with elements of the 51st Regiment
moving toward their objective west of Saigon. During the second day of
the operation, the unit ran into a minefield and took numerous casualties.
Shortly thereafter, instead of continuing the operation, the unit broke
off contact and, to the amazement of its advisors, turned back towards
the city of Saigon. When next located it was in the middle of Saigon
participating in the abortive coup d'etat of September 13, 196}.

From that point on, Hop Tac was a constant source of dispute within
the U.S. Mission. Almost to a man, the civilian agencies "supporting"
Hop Tac felt that the program was unnecessary, repetitive, and doomed.
They claimed that they preferred to work through existing channels, al-
though these, in MACV's view, were inadequate. This view was not stated
openly, however, since the Ambassador and General Westmoreland had com-
mitted all U.S. agencies to full support. On October 6, 1964, for
example, General Taylor sent Washington an EXDIS cable in which he dis-
cussed and rejected a suggestion to decentralize the pacification effort,
and instead listed several actions that the Mission would take. First
among these was a "unanimous recommendation" that the Mission "give full
support to Hop Tac Plan, assuring it the necessary priority to give it
every chance to succeed...When Hop Tac priorities permit, concentrate on
selected weak areas." 2/ Thus there was a reluctance to criticize the
progrem directly.

Deadlines slipped continually; phase lines were readjusted; the
official count of "pacified" hamlets climbed steadily. But a special
study of the area made in October, 1964, by representatives of USOM,
USIS, and MACV concluded: "Generally speaking, Hop Tac, as a progran,
does not appear to exist as a unified and meaningful operation.” 3/

* he official view of Hop Tac was that the new coordinating machinery
was doing some good. Thus, during a period in which cables on the general
situation were rather gloomy, Ambassador Taylor could tell the President

2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
