Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

found it appropriate to send an assessment of the potentialities of
various groups for coups and demonstrations in the short run. Among
these were:

"1. Peasants. Various factors discontent exist such as
lack of adequate protection against communist attacks and
pressures, low prices paddy, compulsory labor on agrovilles
and other projects, and arbitrary methods of authorities. Diem
has taken some steps to try alleviate sources of discontent (our
G-79) but it is important he take others because peasantry
represent key to success or failure communist guerrilla warfare
in countryside and thus to gradual undermining of regime. How-
ever, any sudden demonstration or coup against GVN likely to
center in Saigon and seems improbable that peasantry in view lack
organization, transport problems, etc. would play significant role
therein." (Saigon 538 to SecState, 5 September 1960, p- 1,
Section 1 of 2)

(It is worth noting that this list of peasant grievances against the
regime, like most such analyses by CIA or State, includes a number of
separate factors, of which "lack of protection against communist

attacks and pressures" is only one. This assessment of peasant attitudes
toward the GVN was in some contrast to: (a) other analyses, particularly
originating in the Department of Defense, but also from Diem himself,
emphasizing lack of security as the single significant peasant grievance,
or the overwhelmingly predominant one, or the basis of the others; and
(b) effective U.S. advice and influence, which increasingly centered

upon the security problem. )

Urban groups, including labor and students (who were just
beginning to show political ferment) were judged unlikely to begin a
demonstration but increasingly likely to join one begun by other
oppositionists either within or outside the government. Dissatisfaction
with the regime existed even among Catholic refugees, some of this
stemming "paradoxically . . . from what they feel is too heavily Catholic
leadership of regime (with potential reaction to PELE) vei as ay
(This worry appeared less paradoxical in the summer of 1963.)

As for the Army;

" . . . Some discontent exists because of political pro-
motions and favoritism throughout armed forces structure. Some
disturbing indications of possible development spirit frustration
and defeatism in fight against Viet Cong also received, such as
statement allegedly made by General Duong Van Minh that for every
Viet Cong killed by armed forces government creating ten in their
rear; however indications are that generals remain imbued by
non-political approach and that discontent is not of such

5h POP SECRET - Sensitive
