Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to those submitted in the Draft Presidential Memorandum of the day

earlier, McNamara commented that despite the fact that Brooke's pro-
posals were almost identical to those which he had suggested he had
not discussed any part of the paper or any of the ideas with Brooke.

On the last day of May, the Joint Chiefs of Staff replied to the
19 May Draft Presidential Memorandum prepared by McNaughton. It was
a sharply worded and strong reply, expressing strong objections to the
basic orientation of the paper as well as its specific recommendations
and objectives. The Chiefs resented the implication of the DPM that
Course A generally reflected their recommendations. They insisted
that Course A as outlined in the DPM was an extrapolation of a number
of proposals which were recommended separately but not in concert or
ever interpreted as a single course of action as they were in the DPM.
The JCS categorically denied that the combination force levels, deploy-
ments, and military actions of Course A accurately reflected the posi-
tions or recommendations of COMUSMACV, CINCPAC or the Joint Chiefs.
They stated that the positions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff which would
provide a better basis against which to compare other alternatives
were already set forth in JCSM 218-67, JCSM 286-67 and JCSM 288-67.

There were five major areas of concern detailed in the JCSM: objec-
tives, military strategy in operations, military strategy for air and
naval war, the domestic attitude and predicted reactions in the inter-
national attitude and reaction. Reference objectives, the preferred
course of action in the Draft Presidential Memorandum, Course B, was
not considered by the military heads to be "consistent with NSAM 288
or with the explicit public statements of U.S. policy and objectives."
In the eyes of the Joint Staff:

The DPM would, in effect, limit US objectives to
merely guaranteeing the South Vietnamese the right to
determine their own future on the one hand and offsetting
the effect of North Vietnam's application of force in
South Vietnam on the other. The United States would
remain committed to these two objectives only so long as
the South Vietnamese continue to help themselves. It is
also noted that the DPM contains no statement of mili-
tary objectives to be achieved and that current US national,
military, and political objectives are far more comprehensive
and far-reaching. Thus:

a. The DPM fails to appreciate the full
implications for the Free World of failure to
achieve a successful resolution of the conflict
in Southeast Asia.

b. Modification of present US objectives, as
called for in the DEM, would undermine and no longer

174 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
