Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Land reform is a policy applied throughout the country,
but it must be carried out step by step; first in localities
Where sufficient conditions have been obtained and then in
other localities....

"The Government will deal with the regions inhabited by
the national minorities, the Fifth Zone, South Viet-Nam, and
the guerrilla bases later on. In guerrilla--and enemy--occupied
areas, land reform will be carried out after their liberation.” 66/

Nonetheless, though South Vietnam had been relegated to a low operational
priority, its eventual unification with the DRV became an article of
faith which the Lao Dong leaders repeatedly and solemnly affirmed; for
example, Ho Chi Minh:

"Our compatriots in the Southern area are citizens of
Vietnam. Rivers can dry up and mountains wear away, but
this truth stands.' /Tetter to Southerners, May 3, 1946.7
‘Each day the Fatherland remains disunited, each day you [ot
the South/ suffer, food is without taste, sleep brings no
rest. I solemnly promise you, through your determination, the
determination of all our people, the Southern land will return to
the bosom of the Fatherland.' [october 23, 1946.7 ‘National
reunification is our road to life. Great unity is the power that
will surely triumph. Thanks to this great unity, the Revolution
was successful and the Resistance victorious. Now, with great
unity, our political struggle will certainly be victorious, our
country will certainly be reunified.' /July 5, 1956./ "South
Vietnam is our flesh and blood....Vietnam is one country. South
and North are of the same family, and no reactionary force can
partition it. Vietnam must be reunited.' /September 2, 1957./
‘Every hour, every minute, the people of the North think of
their compatriots in the South. The South Vietnamese people
relentlessly have fought for nearly twenty years, first the
French colonialists, then the American-Diemists. They are
indeed the heroic sons and daughters of the heroic Vietnamese
nation. South Vietnam truly deserves the same: Brass Citadel of
the Fatherland.' /Mey 9, 1963./"

After the Geneva Conference of 1954, the most Ho and the
DRV leaders might have expected was that France and the U.S. would permit
a plebescite to occur, or withdraw under some one of the formulae men-
tioned above, with reunification to follow. However, for reasons which
shall be set forth below, the actual course of events forced them to
adopt what they probably regarded as a minimally acceptable policy, as
follows: 68/

-- Consolidate power in North Vietnam, and expect the South
to collapse from internal dissension.

resp’ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
