Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. A. 1. NATO and SRATO: A Comparison

1. Genesis
a. Truman Doctrine, 1947

In 1946, Winston Churchill perceived a postwar threat in a
wartime ally:

"Nobody knows what Soviet Russia and its communist interna-
tional organization intends to do...what are the limits, if any,
to their expansive and proselytizing tactics...From Stettin in
the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended
across the continent..." 1/

And he also depicted a counter:

"Neither the sure prevention of war, nor the continuous
rise of world organization will be gained without...a special
relationship between the British Commonwealth and Empire and.
the United States..."

These insights were reinforced in early 1947 by influential analyses of
George Kennan and others of Soviet motives and capabilities, which pointed
out that occasional and sporadic efforts to foil Soviet policy were severely
disadvantaged. These analysts held that the West should seek to oppose
Soviet expansionism by what the Foreign Affairs "X" article of January,
1947, called "the adroit and vigilant application of counter-force." 2/
Such a strategy, it was held, would force the Soviet to reassess and ad-
just its policies, and the U.S. could expect eventually the “break-up

or the gradual mellowing of Soviet power." Out of these, and similar
appreciations of Soviet intent emerged the concept of a U.S. strategy

of involvement.

Theory was swiftly abetted by event. The British notified
the U.S. that it would be unable to extend its economic and military aid
to Greece and Turkey beyond March, 1947. The U.S., rather than accept
the distinct possibility of a Soviet intrusion following British withdrawal,
chose to take up the burden the British were laying down in the eastern
Mediterranean. Congress authorized in May, 1947, some $400 million for
direct aid to those countries, acting upon the recommendation of President
Truman in the March, 1947, message known since as the "Truman Doctrine”:

"T believe that it must be the policy of the United States
to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation
by armed minorities or by outside pressures. I believe we must
assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their
own way..." 3/

The President went on to underscore the U.S. determination to commit its
resources to contain communism, clearly subordinating military aid to

A-5 TOP SECRET. - Sensitive
