Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Laotian's [sic] affairs, gross violations of the General Agreements, and
events which are causing a grave situation in Laos and Indochina." DIA
went on to observe that "it would be most difficult to distinguish |
between YANKEE TEAM with its flat suppression aireraft from the BARREL
ROLL missions." Further, the assessment observed that "BARREL ROLL
strikes have followed T-28 strikes by varying periods of time and have
been of lesser intensity. They probably appear to be a continuation of
the Leotian program." It concluded:

"On balance, therefore, while the Communists are apparently
eware of some increased use of U.S. aircraft, they probably
have not considered the BARREL ROLL strikes to date as a sig-

nificant change in the pattern or as representing a new threat
to their activities." 180/

Despite the lack of discernible Communist reaction to BARREL
ROLL by the end of the year and considerable concern among the JCS, there
was little change in the operation during early January. On the hth,
CINCPAC was authorized to go ahead with the fourth week's program:

"One U.S. armed reconnaissance/pre-briefed air strike
missions in Laos for the week of 4-10 January 1965, is ap-
proved. Additional missions will be the subject of later
message." (Underlining added)

The approved mission called for night armed reconnaissance along Route 7,
the first of its kind. 181/ At the time, the JCS were awaiting a decision
on their proposals for a complementary mission, but the Department of State
had objected to their choice of a secondary target because it was located
near Cambodian territory. Harlier in the series, the Tchepone barracks

had been deleted as a secondary mission by the White House because a Hanson
Baldwin article had nemed it as a likely target. On 5 January, the JCS
representative reminded the Principals that the currently approved

BARREL ROLL mission constituted the fourth week of these operations and,
therefore, would terminate the initiel 30-day period of Phase One pres-
sures. The JCS were quite concerned that there had not yet been plans

made for a "transition phase" of stepped up attacks to begin around mid-
January. 182/

ec. Surfacing Infiltration Evidence. An integral part of the
Administration's pressures policy, particularly if U.S. forces were to
be involved in direct attacks on Horth Vietnam, was the presentation to
the public of convincing evidence of DRV responsibility for the precarious
situation in Sovth Vietnam. As seen earlier, a former intelligence
specialist, Chester Cooper, was selected to eompile a public account of
the infiltration of trained cadre and guerrilla fighters, to be used for
this purpose. His account was to be developed from the various classi-
fied reports that had been produced and was to lay particular stress on
se ion ESS in the rate of infiltration in the latter half of
1964.

63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
