Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201!

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Diem, referring Sihanouk's Vientiane press conference (Vien-
tiane's 1979), stated he did not believe there would be 1}-
nation conference and he afraid Laos almost lost already.
Diem argued that since PL occupy almost all of southern Laos,
we must agree increase in RVNAF to provide additional per-
sonnel to train self defense corps which in very bad shape.

Comment; Although Thuan has indicated to /MAAG Chief7 General
McGarr decree designating single officer to conduct counter
insurgency operations being signed imminently, I asked him
morning May 3 when seeing off Harriman and Lemnitzer whether
I would receive before departure "present" he has long prom-
ised me. He replied presents often come when least expected,
which apparently means Diem not yet ready sign decree.

While we should proceed with procurement equipment for 20,000
increase as reconmended my 1606, I do not believe GVN should
be informed of this green light, particularly until above
decree signed. Durbrow. 15/

The February 6 reforms referred to involved a cabinet re-organi-
zation Diem had announced before the start of the CIP negotiations. The
intelligence re-organization was to consolidate the 7 existing services.
The chain of command problem has been discussed above. Diem finally issued
decrees on all these points a few days after Durbrow went home. The de-
erees were essentially meaningless: exactly these same issues remained
high on the list of "necessary reforms" called for after the Taylor Mission,
and indeed throughout the rest of Diem's life.

Iv. DURBROW'S TACTICS

Did Durbrow's tactics make sense? There is an argument to be
made both ways. Certainly if Durbrow's focus was on the pro forma paper-
work, then they did not. Mere formal organizational re-arrangements
(unifying the then 7 intelligence services into 1, setting up at least a
nominal chain of command for the war) often change very little even when
they are seriously intended. To the extent they are not seriously in-
tended, they are almost certain to be meaningless. Vice President Tho, of
course, is cited in the cable as making exactly that point. The very fact
that Durbrow chose to include this remark in the cable (without questioning
it) suggests he agreed. But if squeezing the formal decrees out of Dien
really did not mean much, then what was the point of exacerbating relations
with Dien (not to mention relations with the military members of the U.S.
mission) to get them? In hindsight, we can say there wes none, unless the
U.S. really meant what it had said about making U.S. support for Diem con-
tingent on his taking "corrective measures." Then the function of those
tactics would not have been to squeeze a probably meaningless concession
from Diem; for the cable quoted alone makes it pretty clear that it would

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
