Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Native anti-Viet Minh movements such as Cao Dai, Hoa Hao, Partisans,
ete. have been virtually written off as an asset, and in the case of the
latter two groups have become an admitted liability.

Morale and discipline in all combat units visited during past
months showed a sharp decline over the past year, particularly among
paratroop units. Widespread atrocities have been reported by American
and British sources in the North; health and sanitary conditions in
the field were observed to be very bad; and there is a widespread lack
of confidence in both the French government at home and French general-
ship in Indochina among officers and superior non-coms. Feeling the
general hopelessness of the military situation, many of the albest
young officers are seeking staff rather than combat duty, and only the
most recently arrived French troops show much combat enthusiasm or
smartness of discipline. In this connection, Viet Minh propaganda
makes much of an alleged recent proclamation by Andre MARTE, French
Minister of Justice, offering French convicts a chance to "redeem"
themselves by joining the Colonial Army to fight in Indochina.

The pay of officers and superior non-coms, however, is good to
excellent, particularly in comparison with metropolitan France; pro-
fessional advancement and decorations frequent; and these factors have
inhibited widespread resignations or desertions.

Generalship

The present two top generals in Indochina (BLATZOT and ALLESANDRT)
are thought by French officers to be decidedly second rate, although
served by a first rate General Staff. Area commands (KOCH in Tonkin,
LE BRIS in Annam, DE LA TOUR in Cochinchina) are little more than
autonomous sector commands. All large scale plans and decisions are
made in Saigon by Allesandri and staff, with some interference by the
High Commissariat, particularly on the political implications of
military moves.

The Navy

With a single carrier, a cruiser, a dozen colonial sloops, three
LS?'s, 16 minesweeps, and a variety of small landing craft at its
dispostion, the Naval Command in Indochina is a minor military factor.
Tts functions are: river and coastal patrol (anti-arms and rice smug-
gling); transport and support of troops in amphibious operations, and
protection of river convoys. A regiment of Marines (Fusiliers -
Marins) while officered by the Navy is under Army operational command.
They are recognized as the best combat infantry in Indochina at present.

The Air Force

Some 36 out-dated German Junker transports (JU52's) used for para-
troop operations, are the backbone of the French Air Force in Indochina.
Additional planes are old Spitfires and C47 "8, plus light cbhservation
and personnel planes such as Piper Cubs. Besides transport of para-
troops, the mission of the Air Force is the bombing and strafing of
villages not in French control, support of ground troops and personnel
transport.

As in

180
