Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. To defeat the VC and NVA forces in SVN and force the
withdrawal of NVN forces....

ec. To extend GVN control over all of SVN.

Indeed, in asking for increased forces, General Wheeler and General
Westmoreland described their current tasks as follows:

a. Security of Cities and Government.
b. Security in the Countryside.

ec. Defense of the Borders, the DMZ, and the Northern
Province.

d. Offensive Operations. 4g/

The question to be answered, then, suggested the memorandum, was what
we could hope to accomplish with these increased force levels in pursuit of
our current strategy. The answer was not encouraging.

With current force levels we cannot continue to pursue all
of the objectives listed by General Wheeler. Can we de so with
increased forces? .

MACV does not clearly specify how he would use the addi-
tional forces he requests, except to indicate that they
would provide him with a theater reserve and an offensive
capability. Even with the 200,000 additional troops requested
by MACV, we will not be in a position to drive the enemy from
SVN or to destroy his forces. MACV's description of his key
problems makes clear that the additional forces would be used
to open Route 1, north of Danang; support ARVN units, particu-
larly in the Delta; and to maintain a reserve against enemy
offensives. With lesser increases of 50,000 or 100,000,
MACV would be in an even less favorable position to go on the
offensive. Moreover, even before the TET offensive the
enemy was initiating about two-thirds of the clashes and
could, in response to our buildup, adopt a casualty limiting
posture. r

The more likely enemy response, however, is that with
which he has responded to previous increases in our force
levels, viz., a matching increase on his part. Hanoi has
maintained 2 constant ratio of one maneuver battalion to
1.5 U.S, maneuver battalions from his reserve in NVN of
from 45-70 maneuver battalions (comprising 40,000-60,000
men in 5-8 divisions).

So: TOP SECRET - Sensitive
