Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B, OCO on Trial: Too Little Too Late -=- Or Not Enough Time?

With the formation of OCO in late November the civilian mission
began to move at a more repid pace than it had in the post-—Honolulu
period, Most of this motion, of course, was internal to the U.S.
Mission and could not produce visible results against the VC, an under-
standable fact when one considers the amount of work that the decision
involved,

First, a Director of Civil Operations had to be chosen, Since
Washington demanded rapid action, it was decided that the choice had to
be someone already in Vietnam and ready to work, which sharply narrowed
the list of possible men. The final selection was L. Wade Lathram, who
had been the deputy director of USAID, Lathram was to prove to be the
wrong man at the wrong time, a methodical and slow worker with strong
respect for the very interagency system that he was supposed to super-
cede. In normal bureaucracies, Lathram could, and had, compiled excel-
lent records, but OCO was demanding extraordinary results, and these
required leadership and drive which Lathram did not possess,

It had been anticipated that Porter, a popular Ambassador and a
knowledgeable and realistic man, would supply that leadership and drive,
and that Lathram would simply run the OCO staff below Porter, But
neither Porter nor Lathram saw their roles that way. Once OCO was
formed, Porter to an unexpected degree stayed away from the day to day
decisions, leaving them to Lathram. And Lathram simply did not have the
position nor the stature to stand up to the full members of the Mission
Council, whose assets he now partially controlled. (There was continued
confusion over what was the responsibility of OCO and what remained under
the control of the USAID, CIA and JUSPAO directors, and this confusion
was never resolved -- and continues today under the CORDS structure.)

Moreover, Porter, who had not wanted a second Deputy Ambassador to
come in to relieve him of all non-RD matters, soon found himself tied
down in the business of the Embassy, Lodge went on a long leave shortly
after the formation of OCO, taking about one month's vacation in Europe
and the United States. This left Porter with responsibility for the full
gamut of Ambassadorial activities, and he unavoidably became less and
less concerned with the progress of OCO, even though it was in its first
eritical month. He had been given an office in the new OCO building
(appropriated from ATD) , but he rarely used it, staying in the Embassy
in another part of Saigon, and showing, in effect, by his failure to use
his OCO office often that he could not devote much time to OCO.

The failure, therefore, to isolate Porter from all non-RD matters
and provide Lodge with a full time DCM turned out to be a serious error,
McNemere had clearly foreseen this in his 15 October memorandim to the
President. In retrospect, we can see that Porter should have been given
one job or the other, and the vacancy filled -- as Washington had suggested.

‘ 122
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
