Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But DRV attention has been directed to the Moscow Declaration of 1957,
embodied in the "Communique on the Conference of Representatives of
Communist and Workers Parties of Socialist Countries," which took
quite a different line:

"The communist and workers parties are faced with
great historic tasks . . . In present day conditions in
a nunber of capitalist countries, the working class has
the possibility . . . to unite the majority of the people,
when state power without civil war can ensure the transfer
of basic means of production to the hands of the people .
[Fowever/ in conditions in which the exploiting classes
resort to violence against the people, it is necessary to
bear in mind another possibility -- nonpeaceful transition
to socialism. Leninism teaches and history confirms that the
ruling classes never relinguish power voluntarily. In these
conditions the severity and forms of class struggle will
depend not so much on the proletariat as on the resistance
of the reactionary circles to the will of the overwhelming
majority of the people, on the use of force by these
circles at one or another stage of the struggle for
socialism." 171/

The congruence of this Declaration with Ho's April, 1956, statement
to the Ninth Plenum of the Iao Dong Party Central Committee (supra,
46-47) and with the rhetoric Hanoi had been using to condemn Diem,
seems more than coincidental. Ie Duan returned from Moscow ahead of
Ho to present the results to the Iao Dong leaders, and issued on

7 December 1957 a public statement that the Declaration:

". . « not only confirmed the line and created
favorable conditions for North Vietnam to advance toward
socialism, but has also shown the path of struggle for
national liberation and has created favorable conditions
for the revolutionary movement in South Vietnam." 172/

Some authorities have viewed the "crisis of 1957" within
the Iao Dong leadership as a clash of factions over whether to align
with the bellicose Mao (pro Truong Chinh, Nguyen Duy Trinh) or remain
loyal to the temporizing Soviets (pro Ho and Giap). 173/ P. J. Honey,
for example, found it significant that even Mao acknowledged Soviet
leadership at the 1957 Moscow Conference, and notes that in February,
1948, the spokesman for the DRV National Assembly's Political Sub-
committee announced that:

"Our firm international position is to stand in the

socialist camp headed by the Soviet Union. . . This position
proceeds from our people's fundamental interests and from

51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
