Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Such factors as the prevalence of illiteracy,
the lack of suitable educational media, and the
absence of adequate communications in the outlying
areas would render the holding of a truly representa-
tive plebiscite of doubtful feasibility. The Com-
munists, by virtue of their superior capability in
the field of propaganda, could readily pervert the
issue as being a choice between national independence
and French Colonial rule. Furthermore, it would be
militarily infeasible to prevent widespread intimi-

dation of voters by Communist partisans. While it
is obviously impossible to make a dependable fore-
cast as to the outcome of a free election, current
intelligence leads the Joint Chiefs to the belief
that a settlement based upon free elections would,
be attended by almost certain loss of the Associated
States to Communist control."

The JCS views, together with their recommendation that the U.S. not
associate itself with any settlement that "would fail to provide
reasonably adequate assurance of the future political and territorial
integrity of Indochina..." were approved by the Secretary of Defense
on 23 March. 2/ '

ad. The U.S. Proposes United Action

Secretary Dulles on March 29 publicly proposed collective
military operations as a future course of action for the "free world"
in Indochina. Dulles suggested the organization of a ten-nation collec-
tive defense alliance for Southeast Asia. 3/ Such a coalition was
the U.S. Government's preferred. alternative to unilateral U.S. interven-
tion, either at Dien Bien Phu, or subsequently in a more general con-
text. With the climax at Dien Bien Phu approaching, the inter-agency
debate in Washington had made clear that American intervention there
solely with air and naval forces was neither desirable nor feasible,
and. there was little support for a ground intervention. United action
also was the result of the Eisenhower's Administration's inability to
marshal support among Congressional leaders for a unilateral U.S. in-
tervention without participation by the allies. President Bisenhower
himself clearly preferred intervention through united action to a purely
American undertaking.

The united action proposal, however, was not acceptable
either to the British or to the French before the Geneva Conference.
The British thought that any military intervention under united action
prior to Geneva would impede a political settlement at the Conference
and most likely lead to a further expansion of the war, including a

A-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
