Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Moreover, we are in Vietnam to fulfill one of the most
solemn pledges of the American Nation. Three Presidents --,
President Eisenhower, President Kennedy, and your present
President -- over 11 years have committed themselves and
have promised to help defend this small and valiant nation.

"Strengthened by that promise, the people of South
Vietnam have fought for many long years. Thousands of them
have died. Thousands more have been crippled and scarred by
war. We just cannot now dishonor our word, or abandon our
commitment, or leave those who believed us and who trusted
us to the terror and repression and murder that would follow.

"This,. then, my fellow Americans, is why we are in
Vietnam."

As far as increases in U.S. forces were concerned, the President said

"First, we intend to convince the Communists that we
cannot be defeated by force of arms or -by superior power.
They are not easily convinced. In recent months they have
greatly increased their fighting forces and their attacks
and the number of incidents. I have asked the commanding
general, General Westmoreland, what more he needs to meet
this mounting aggression. He has told me. We will meet
his needs.

"I have today ordered to Vietnam the Airmobile Division
and certain other forces which will raise our fighting
strength from 75,000 to 125,000 men almost immediately.
Additional forces will be needed later, and they will be
sent as requested. This will make it necessary to increase
our active fighting forces by raising the monthly draft call
from 17,000 over a period of time to 35,000 per month, and
for us to step up our campaign for voluntary enlistments.

“After this past week of deliberations, I have concluded
that it is not essential to order Reserve wnits into service
now. If that necessity should leter be indicated, I will
give the matter most careful consideration and I will give
the country due and adequate notice before taking such action,
but only after full preparations.

"We have also discussed with the Government of South Vietnam
lately the steps that we will take to substantially increase
their own effort, both on the battlefield and toward reform and
progress in the villages. Ambassador Lodge is. now formulating
a new program to be tested upon his return to that area.”

138 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
