Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

+

é.
currency requirements during the period August-1940 to March 9, 1945. Since
the earmarking of the gold transferred title to Indochina and since there are
no general considerations of equity or public policy of a sufficiently compelling
nature to justify withholding recognition of title thus transferred, the tentative
position of the Depratment is that SCAP deliver the gold to Indochina unless
an early FEC policy decision precludes such action.

C. RELATIONS WITH OTHER STATES

The French, whose policy since the Japanese surrender has been a failure
with regard to the Vietnamese, have made some progress in normalizing .their
relations with Cambodia and Laos. Both these Indochinese protectorates have
now been formally admitted as “associated” states to the French Union. The
peoples of both these protectorates have been allowed some degree of autonomy,
which apparently satisfies them for the present. Unquestionably, however, the
current modi vivendi will be altered by any French settlement with the Vietna-
mese which gives the latter more autonomy than now possessed by the Laotians
and Cambodians. ; :

The most recent French attempt to resolve the question resulted in the
June 5 Baie d’Along Agreement between the French High Commissioner of
Indochina and General Nguyen Van Xuan, head of the Provisional Central
Government of Vietnam, and countersigned by the former Emperor of Annam,
Bao Dai. In this agreement, France recognizes the independence of Vietnam,
whose responsibility it will be to unite the three Vietnamese provinces of Indo-
china, with only such limits as are imposed by its membership in the French
Union to which it freely declares its adherence. Further negotiations to fix re-
lationships of France and Vietnam are provided by the agreement which must
now be ratified by the French Assembly, particularly as it relates “to a change
in the status of Cochinchina, now a French colony, to permit its union with
Annam and Tonkin.

As regards international conferences, the US, as it recognizes French sover-
eionty over Indochina, has upheld the right of France as a metropolitan power
to submit the applications for associate membership in ECAFE of its dependent
areas in Indochina. :

French relations with the Siamese Government have improved since the
November coup d’etat of Field Marshal Phibun. Phibun apparently has given
assurances to the French that he has accepted the solution of the recent Siamese-

“Indochinese border dispute. He has furthermore taken limited measures de-

signed to reduce the activity of Indochinese elements in Siam hostile to the”

French.
Chinese relations with Indochina, based upon a 1946 treaty which confers

substantial benefits upon ‘the Chinese in the peninsula, are largely determined
by the needs and interests of the commercially and economically powerful
Chinese overseas community in Indochina, numbering alrnost one million.
On the surface, Chinese official relations with the French officials have been

f SSECREF—

ALT

Ay
