Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

should be held at no more than $50 million per year; (4) the U.S. phase-
out was too slow, and the RVNAF training had to be speeded up. In other
words, Mr. McNamara wanted both a more rapid U.S. withdrawal of personnel,
and a faster reduction in U.S. military/economic support.

The Secretary's views prevailed. The embodiment of Mr. McNamara's
desire to quicken the pace of phase-out planning was embodied first in a
Model M plan prepared by the JCS and later in what came to be called the
Accelerated Model Plan of the CPSVN. The Accelerated Plan provided for
a rapid phase-out of the bulk of U.S. military personnel. It also pro-
vided for building up GVN forces at a faster pace, but at a more reduced
scale. MAP costs for FY 1965-1969 totaled $399.4 million, or nearly $300
million lower than the original projection.

All of this planning began to take on a kind of absurd quality as
the situation in Vietnam deteriorated drastically and visibly. Strangely,
as @ result of the public White House promise in October and the power of
the wheels set in motion, the U.S. did effect a 1000 man withdrawal in
December of 1963. All the planning for phase-out, however, was either
ignored or caught up in the new thinking of January to March 1964 that
preceded NSAM 288. The thrust of this document was that greater U.S.
support was needed in SVN. Mr. McNamara identified these measures as
those that "will involve a limited increase in U.S. personnel and in
direct Defense Department costs." He added: “More significantly they
involve significant increases in Military Assistance Program costs....,"
plus "additional U.S. economic aid to support the increased GVN budget."
On 27 March 1964, CINCPAC was instructed not to take any further action
on the Accelerated Plan. Quickly, requests for more U.S. personnel poured
into Washington. The planning process was over, but not forgotten.
Secretary McNamara stated in his August 1964 testimony on the Tonkin Gulf
crisis that even today "if our training missions are completed, we will
pring back the training forces."

While the phase-out policy was overtaken by the sinking after-effects
of the Diem coup, it is important to understand that the vehicles chosen
to effect that policy -- MAP planning, RVNAF and U.S. force levels --
were the right ones. They were programmatic and, therefore, concrete and
visible. No better way could have been found to convince those in our
own government and the leaders of the GVN that we were serious about limit-
ing the U.S. commitment and throwing the burden onto the South Vietnamese
themselves. The public announcement of the policy, on October 2, 1963,
after the McNamara-Taylor trip to Vietnam was also a wise choice. Even
though this announcement may have contributed to the so-called "credibility
gap," publication was a necessity. Without it, the formal and classified
planning process would have seemed to be nothing more than @ drill.

While the choice of means was appropriate for getting a handle on
the problem, it proceeded from some basic unrealities. First, only the
most Micawberesque predictions could have led decision-makers in Washing-
ton to believe that the fight against the guerrillas would have clearly
turned the corner by FY 65. Other nations' experience in internal war-
fare pointed plainly in the other direction. with more propitious

Vv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
