Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Such "strategic" targets had not been entirely exempted
from attack, of course, but they had been exempted from attack where
they counted most, in the sanctuary areas. ‘This occasioned some
embarrassment in the Administration because any attack on such
targets seemed inconsistent with a purely interdiction rationale,
while failure to attack the most important of them did not satisfy
a strategic bombing rationale. Secretary McNamara was pressed hard
on these points when he appeared before the Congressional armed
services and appropriations committees in August 1965 with a major
supplemental budget request for the Vietnam War. Senator Cannon
asked :

I know that our policy was to not attack power sta-
tions and certain oil depots and so on earlier. But
within the past two weeks we have noticed that you have
attacked at least one or more power stations. I am
wondering if your policy has actually changed now in
regard to the targets. In other words, are we stepping
up the desirability of certain targets?

Secretary McNamara replied:

I would say we are holding primarily to these
targets I have outlined. This week's program, for
example, includes primarily, I would say, 95 percent
of the sorties against fixed targets are against supply
depots, ammo depots, barracks...but only one or two
percent of the sorties directed against [one power plant/.

I don't want to mislead you. We are not bombing
in the Hanoi...or the Haiphong area. There is a very
good reason for that. In Haiphong there is a substantial
petroleum dump /for exemple/. First, there is question
whether destruction of that dump would influence the
level of supply into South Vietnam. Secondly, General
Westmoreland believes that an attack on that would lead
to an attack on the petroleum dumps outside of Saigon
that contain eighty percent of the petroleum storage
for SVN. Thirdly, there is the real possibility that
an attack on the Haiphong petroleum would substantially
increase the risk of Chinese participation....for all
those reasons it seems unwise at this time...to attack
that petroleum dump....

In defending the policy of not attacking the powerplants and POL sites
concentrated in the Hanoi /Heiphong area, the Secretary did not stress

the interdiction purposes of the bombing but rather the risks of widening
the war. He explained that an attack on the powerplants and POL sites
would require also attacking Phue Yen airfield and the surrounding SAM

sites:

48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
