Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"At the risk of over-simplification, I see management of
the pacification problem es involving three main sub-tasks;
(1) providing local security in the countryside -- essentially
a militery/police/cadre task; (2) breaking the hold of the
VC over the people; and (3) positive programs to win the active
-support of tne rural population.

"...Few argue that we can assure success in Vietnem without
also winning the ‘village war.' Chasing the large units around
the boondocks still leaves intact the VC infrastructure, with
its local guerrilla capability plus the weapons of terror and
intimidation...So winning the ‘village war’ which I will loosely
call pacification. seems an indispenseble ingredient of any high-
confidence strategy and a necessary precaution to close the
guerrilla option.

",..Yet another reason for stressing pacification is that
the U.S. is supporting a lot of assets in being which are at
the moment poorly employed. Even the bulk of ARVN, which in-
creasingly sits back and watches the U.S, take over the more
difficult parts of the war against main enemy units and bases,
might be more effectively used for this purpose...Thus, even if
one contends that pacification es I have defined it is not vital
to a win stratesy, stepping up this effort would add little to
present costs and might produce substantial pay offs.

"Beyond this, the time is psychologically ripe for greater
emphasis on pacification, South Vietnamese confidence is grow~
ing as the U.S, turns the tide. New US/FW military forces are
arriving to reinforce the campaign against the main force; their
presence will release much needed assets to pacification. The
GVN, fresh from success against the Buddhist led struggle and
confidently facing an election process leading toward a consti-
tution, also has been making the kind of tough decisions --,
devaluation, turnover of the Saigon port to military management,
etc. -- that will be needed in pacification, too.

"In sum, the assets are available, and the time is ripe for
an increased push to win the 'village war.'

"TIT. What is Holding Up the Pacification Efforts? The long

history of the Vietnam struggle is replete with efforts to secure
the countryside. Most of them, like Diem's strategic hamlet
program, proved abortive. ...Some of the chief difficulties we
confront are suggested below:

"A, We had to go after the major VC/NVA units first... It

was a matter of first things first... :

“67 7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
