Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"MR, SMITH: Yes, it is. If Indochina is lost to the Communists,
Burma is threatened, Thailand is threatened, the Malay Peninsula is
exposed, Indonesia is subject to the gravest danger, and, in addition to
these countries and their possible loss, there is the possible loss of
food source. I have already mentioned the strategic raw materials, the
bases in the area: and, while they are of enormous importance, the most
important thing of all is the possible loss of millions and millions
of people who would disappear behind the Iron Curtain. There are enough
millions behind the Iron Curtain now. So what's at stake in Indochina?
Tt is the human freedom of the masses of people for all that enormous
area of the world.”

** + *

8. Statement by Secretary Dulles Made at August, Georgia, April 19,
1954, on Conversations in London and Paris Concerning Indochina
Department of State Bulletin, May 3, 1954, p. 668:

"I have reported to President Eisenhower on my recent trip to
London and Paris, where I discussed the position in Indochina.

"I found in both Capitals recognition that the armed Communist
threat endangered vital free world interest and made it appropriate thet
the free nations most immediately concerned should explore the possibility
of establishing a collective defense. This same recognition had already
peen expressed by other nations of the Southeast Asian area,

"The Communists in Viet-Nam, spurred on by Red China, have acted
on the assumption that a quick, easy victory at Dien-Bien-Phu would open
the door to a rapid Communist advance to domination of the entire South-
east Asien area. They concluded they were justified in recklessly
squandering the lives of their subjects to conquer this strongpoint so
as to confront the Geneva Conference with what could be portrayed as
both a military and political victory for communism.

"The gallant defenders of Dien-Bien-Phu have done their part to
assure a frustration of the Communist strategy. They have taken a toll
such that, from a military standpoint, the attackers already lost more
than they could win. From a political standpoint, the defenders of
Dien-Bien-Phu have dramatized the struggle for freedom so that the free
world sees more clearly than ever before the issues that are at stake
and once again is drawing closer together in unity of purpose.

"The Communist rulers are learning egain that the will of the free
is not broken by violence or intimidation.

"The brutal Soviet conquest of Czechoslovakia did not disintegrate
the will of the West. It led to the formation of the North Atlantic
Treaty alliance.

"the violent conquest of the China mainland followed by the Korean
ageression did not paralyze the will of the free nations. It led to 4

B-13
