(7.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

5- Diplomatically position that the yiolations to be docu-
mented in Jorden report end strong references to DRV attack against
SVN in DM's letter to Kennedy, need not confirm to the world

“and Communists that Geneva accords are being disregarded by our

increased aid. Need not accuse ourselves publicly, make Communist
job easier. GVN should be advised to counter charges by leveling

- charges against DRV and insisting that if ICC investigates in

SVN must equally investigate in NVN.. Appreciate approach will make
icc task difficult but will explain position to Canadians and
Indians to get their support.

6. A crucial element in USG willingness to move forward is

concrete demonstration by Diem that he is now prepared to work

in an orderly way on his subordinates and broaden the political base
of his regime.

7-. Package should be presented as first steps in a partner-
ship in which US is prepared to do more as joint study of facts and
GVN performance makes increased US aid possible and productive.

6. ‘stiit possible Ieotian settlement can be reached pertaining

our minimum objective of independent Laos on the basis of a neutral

coalition, (although weak and unsatisfactory), headed by Soubanna.
Would include provision Iaos not be used as transit area or base
for interference in SVN. Therefore must keep in mind impact of
action in SVN or prospects for acceptable Laos settlement.

9. Introduction of US or Sento forces into SVN before
Iaotian settlement might wreck chinges; for agreement, lead to break
up of Geneva conference, bresk Il; e cease fire by communists
with resumption of hostilities.

10. Decision to introduce US combat forces in GV would have to
be taken in light of GVN effort, including support from people,
iaotian situation, Berlin crisis, readiness of allies or sharply
increased tension with Bloc, and enormous responsibilities which would
haye to be borne by US in event of escalation SEA or other areas.

Ji. Hope measures outlined in instructions will galvanize and
supplement GVN effort, making decision on use of US combat forces
unnecessary and no need for decision in effect to shift primary
responsibility for defense of SVN to USG.

12. We are fully cognizant of extent to which decisions if imple-
mented through Diem's acceptance will sharply increase the
commitment of our prestige struggle to save SVN.

136 LK
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
