~
ta

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"We do not believe that the Chinese Communist regime represents the
will of the people it controls. First capitalizing on the natural desire
of the Chinese people to enjoy full recognition and respect for their
importance in the world community, the regime then proceeded by its
"lean-to-one-side' policy to betray the powerful Chinese longings to
stand up straight. It has followed slavishly the leadership of the
Soviet Union and attempted to emulate it in all its ways. With the aid
of thousands of Soviet advisers it has set about methodically to change
the entire fabric of traditional Chinese culture, substituting com-
munism's materialistic, atheistic doctrines wherein the state is the
be-all and end-all and the individual its pawn.

"The regime at first attracted considerable support, principally
through its sponsorship of a land redistribution program, but is now,
after establishment of the prerequisite police-state controls, taking
the land away from the owners in the seme collectivization process which
is familiar in other Communist countries and which invariably has
brought suffering in its wake. China's much advertised 'New Democracy'
is of course in reality ‘old communisn.'

"From its inception the regime has proclaimed a 'lean-to-one-
side' policy in foreigm affairs, and has left no doubt about its dedica-
tion to the proposition of world Communist revolution under the leader-
ship of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. While its 'leaning-to-
one-side’ has not brought it to the position of complete 'prostration-
to-one-side’ characteristic of the Eastern European Soviet satellites,
there is not the slightest evidence that this indicates any separatist
tendencies. The difference in status of Peiping in its relationship
with Moscow (as distinguished from that of the Eastern European satel-
lites) is rather due chiefly to its having come to power without benefit,
except in Manchuria, of Soviet Army occupation; to the prestige of Mao
Tse-tung, arising from his long history of leadership of Chinese com-
munism and his literary contributions to theoretical communism; to
China's assumption of the role of leadership...."

eS Se

6. President Eisenhower's News Conference, Avril 7, 1954., Public

Papers of the Presidents, 1954, p. 362:

x ot

"Q.. Robert Richards, Copley Press: Mr. President, would you mind
commenting on the strategic importance of Indochina to the free world?
I think there har been, across the country, some lack of understanding
on just what it means to us.

"THE PRESIDENT. You have, of course, both the specific and the
general when you talk about such things.

"First of all, you have the specific value of a locality in its
production of materials that the world needs.

B-10
