Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In addition to providing for stronger, more determined actions, these
alternatives also provided for sizeable force build-ups that "should
make miscalculation of U.S, resolve less likely." Option C was objec-
tionable in their view because it did not permit "a clear set of agreed
military objectives" end because it provided for "the contingency that
as developments are analyzed, it may be thought expedient to settle for
less than complete achievement of our objectives for RVN and Laos." It
is important to note that in outlining the last two options, the JCS
Stressed thet they called for "controlled" programs. 106/ In the
mode of Admiral Mustin's memorandum, referred to earlier, they were
apparently attempting to combat the Working Group's inferences that the
more intensive actions which the JCS advocated were not controllable.
It is fairly clear that group members favoring Option C had tagged the
extreme Option B with a JCS label.

b. Rostow Views. Whereas the JCS emphasized damaging actions,
designed to affact Hanoi's will be destroying a significant portion of
their capability, Walt Rostow urged a different approach. In his view,
emphasis should have been placed on signalling to Hanoi and Peking our
commitment to use Our vast resources to whatever extent required to
reinstate effectively the provisions of the 1954 and 1962 Geneva Accords.

With respect to military moves most useful for this purpose,
Rostow communicated to Secretary McNamara his concern that "too much
thought is being given to the actual damage we do in the North, not
enough thought to the Signal we wish to send." Outlining a concept
Similar to the earliest Option C, he urged that the initiel use of
additional force against North Vietnam “should be as limited and unsan-
guinary as possible" and that i+

“should be designed merely to install the principle
that /the DRV/ will, from the present forward, be
vulnerable to...ettack...for continued violations
of the 1954 and 1962 Accords. In other words, we
would signal a shift from the principle involved
in the Tonkin Gulf resyonse." 107/

Even more important, in his view, would be the signals commmicated by
additional military moves in the Southeast Asia region. He urged de-
ploying U.S. ground forces to South Vietnam and large-scale retaliatory
forces into the Western Pacific. Besides their velue as a bargaining
counter, Rostow sew & ground force commitment as a clear signal that

"we are prepared, to face down any form of escalation North Vietnam might
mount on the ground." He argued that such a rove would rule out "the
possibility of /the Communists/ radically extending their position on
the ground at the cost of air and naval damage alone.” He stated that
the increased revaliatory forces would signal:

"that we are putting in place a capacity subsequently
to step up direct and naval pressure on the north,

+ 35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
