seme

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PLANNING BEGINS IN EARNEST

The President did, however, issue several "hunting licenses."
The Defense Department was directed to examine fully (under the
guidance of the State Department's Director of the continuing Task
Force on Vietnam) "the size and composition of forces which would be
desirable in the case of a possible commitment of U.S. forces to
Vietnam." 50/ The Ambassador was authorized to sound out Diem on
@ bilateral defense treaty. 51/ President Kennedy also apparently
decided to feel out Diem's reaction on the subject of U.S. combat
troops in Vietnam. Vice President Johnson left almost immediately
to visit South Vietnam and other Asian nations. He was empowered
to bring up the question of troops as well as the treaty.

But discussions are one thing; firm commitments are quite another.
The range of alternatives that President Kennedy was willing to consider
seems clear. What he was willing to do was quite another matter. Unless
he was most unlike other politicians and unless the many personad accounts
of his style are completely erroneous he was willing to do what he believed
he had to do ~~ and events in mid-1961 did not force action even though
the "drill" that the Administration went through was instrumental in

defining the probeble responses when events did force action.

As it quickly turned out, President Diem wanted neither U.S. troops
nor @ treaty at that time. He told Vice President Johnson that he wanted
troops only in the event of overt invasion and showed no interest in a
treaty.52/ Nevertheless, the Vice President, wpon his return, was trenchant
in his observations that the time for deeds to replace words was fast
approaching if the U.S. was tomake its declared commitment credible:

Our mission arrested the decline of confidence in the
United States. It did not -~ in my judgment -- restore
any confidence already lost. The leaders were as explicit,
as courteous and courtly as men could be in making it clear
that deeds must follow words -- soon.

We. didn't buy time -- we were given it.

If these men I saw at your request were bankers, I would
know -- without bothering to ask -- that there would be no
further extensions on my note. 53/

Diem may not have been quite so disinterested in U.S. troops as he
appeared to be. NSAM 52 of 11 May had discussed, inconclusively, the
proposed buildup of RVNAIF from 170,000 to 200,000 in order to create two
new divisions to help seal the Laotian border. When President Diem
responded (on 9 June) to Vice President Johnson's invitation to prepare
a set of proposals on South Vietnam's military needs, he recommended a
quantum jump in strength to 270,000 and suggested a substantial increase
in the US MAAG, perhaps even in the form of U.S. units:

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
