Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECERT = Sensitive

A good deal of bureaucratic compromise had gone into the CIP.

Ambassador Durbrow only reluctantly conceded any real need for the
20,000 man force increase. The stress on civil reforms, in particular
on civil reforms as part of a quid pro quo, came into the plan only
after the Saigon Embassy became involved, although there were general
allusions to such things even in the original military draft of the
CIP.

Nevertheless, there was at least a paper agreement, and so far
as the record shows, substantial real agreement as well. No one com-
plained the plan was inadequate. It would, "if properly implemented,"
"turn the tide.” And, by implication, it would do so without any major
increase in American personnel in Vietnam, and indeed, aside from the
one-shot outfitting of the new units, without even any major increase
in American aid. 5/

None of this meant that the warnings that we have seen in the
Saigon Embassy's dispatches or in the August SNIE were not seriously
intended. What it did mean was that, as of early 1961, the view that
was presented to senior officials in Washington essentially showed the
VC threat as a problem which could be pretty confidently handled, given
a little more muscle for the army and some shaping up by the Vietnam-
ese administration. Any doubts expressed went to the will and compe-
tence of the Diem regime, not to the strength of the VC, the role of
Hanoi, or the adequacy of U.S. aid.

Consequently, among the assumptions listed as underlying the
CIP, we find (with emphasis added):
That the Government of Viet-Nam has the basic potential
to cope with the Viet Cong guerrilla threat if necessary cor-
rective measures are taken and adequate forces are provided. 6/

That of course was the heart of the CIP bargain: the U.S. would
‘provide support for the "adequate forces" if Diem would take the "neces-
sary corrective steps." The hinted corollary was that our commitment to
Diem should be contingent on his performance:

That at the present time the Diem government offers the
best hope for defeating the Viet Cong. 7/

IT. LANSDALE'S REPORT

Running against these suggestions (of a firm bargaining position
contingent on Diem's performance), was concern that if Diem were overthrown
his successors might be no better; and that the VC might exploit the con-
fusion and perhaps even civil war following a coup. Further, there was an
argument that part of Diem's reluctance to move on reforms was that he was

a OU
