Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

fOP SECRET - Sensitive

leaders. 23/ Apparently, we had pub full confidence in the coup com-
mittee's offers of safe conduct to the brothers and, reluctant to inter-
cede on behelf of Diem and Nhu fer fear of appearing to offer support

to them or of reneging om our pledges of non-interference to the generals,
we had not appreciated the degree of hatred of the Ngo family among the
generals, nor their fear that if the brothers survived the coup they
would somehow, sometime stage a comeback. In their first meeting with
lodge after the coup, however, the generals denied that the assassination
had been ordered, and promised to make public their offer of safe conduct
to Diem if he would resign, 2h/

While the callousness of the murders of Diem and Nhu, their previous
repressiveness notwithstanding, horrified the world, the succees of the
coup end the deaths of the hated brothers were greeted with popular jubi-
lation in South Vietnam. Spontaneous street demonstrations by students
in a holiday mood ended in the burning of the offices of the Times of
Vietnam and the destruction of a statue modeled after Mme. Nhu. The
tension released set off celebrations rivaled only by the annual Tet
New Year festivities. Americans were greeted and received with great
enthusiasm, and Ioedge was widely regarded as the hero of the whole train
of events. Vietnamese were heard to remark that if an election for
president were held Lodge would win by a landslide. 25/

Thus, the nine-year rule of Ngo Dinh Diem came to a sudden, bloody,
and permanent end, and U.S. policy in Vietnam plunged into the unknown,
our complicity in the coup only heightening our responsibilities and our
commitment in this struggling, leaderless land. We could be certain only
that whatever new leadership emerged would be fragile, untried, and
untested.

2. Mstablishment of an Interim Regime

ven before the initiation of the coup, the coup committee through
General Kim had been in touch with civilian political oppositionists and
to some extent with members of Diem's government. Once the success of
the coup was certain, negotiations with these civilians by the generals'
committee began in earnest. On the night of November 1 and the folloy-
ing day, all ministers of Diem's government were told to submit their
resignations and did so, some on U.S. advice. No reprisals were taken
against them. Indeed, Vice President Tho entered into intensive nego-~
tiations with General Minh on November 2 on the composition of the in-
terim government. He apparently understood the eagerness of the generals
to heave him heed a new government to provide continuity, and he used this
knowledge to bargain with them about the composition of the cabinet. He
was not to be their pliant tool.

While these conferences were taking place, the coup committee, or

"Revolutionary Committee" as it was now calling itself, distributed
leaflets and press releases announcing the dissolution of the National

60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
