Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Pleiku (in the highlands). The other alternative proposed the deploy-

ment of a division to the highland provinces of Kontum, Pleiku, and

Darlac. 66/ Significantly, the coastal city deployment and the second
alternative were the two principal contenders for the location of the

Ist Cavalry Division (Airmobile) debated later in the year. The second
alternative was the one favored by both Johnson and JCS Chairman Wheeler .67/

By far the most dogged protagonist of the enclave strategy was
Ambassador Taylor. He was consistent in his opposition to the initial
involvement of U.S. forces in ground combat. As he saw his position
being eroded on that question, it would seem natural for him to have
fallen back in an only slightly less conservative posture. On- 18 March
1965, in a cable already quoted in its entirety in Section II, Taylor
brought up the question of the deployment of a U.S. division and presented
the highland and coastal enclave alternatives. While not backing either
alternative at that juncture, he did say that "the coastal enclave mis-
sion is safer, simpler but less productive than the inland mission.” In
regard to the latter, he said: "The inland mission in the highlands is
clearly the more ambitious and, if well done, will make a greater contri-
bution during the present critical period. On the other hand, it is the
more exposed and even permits one to entertain the possibility of a kind
of Dien Bien Phu if the coastal provinces should collapse and our forces
were cut off from the coast except by air.” 68/

The Ambassador received no response from Washington to the
cable quoted above. He sent another one on the 27th of March in which
he reminded Washington that it was high time to make some decisions con-
cerning U.S. strategy in Vietnam. According to Taylor, there were three
choices: (1) to carry on with the present level of commitment and hope
that Rolling Thunder would cause the DRV to cease its support, (2) to
try and reverse the trend at least in a few key areas, and (3) to try
and win as quickly as possible. If U.S. forces were to come, Taylor
offered three alternatives for their mission: (1) defensive or offen-
sive enclave, (2) territorial clear and hold, and (3) general reserve.
For himself, Taylor preferred a combination of the offensive enclave
plus reserve in case of an emergency. 69/ This was essentially the
position that he carried into the NSC meetings in Washington of 1-2 April

1965.

Ambassador Taylor met with Secretary McNamara and the JCS in
Washington just prior to the NSC meetings. He was shown the JCS's plan
+o introduce three divisions of U.S. and Korean troops into Vietnam for
conibat operations against the Viet Cong. That plan, which Taylor was
inclined to oppose but. which had the qualified support of McNamara, was
undoubtedly also a focus of discussion within the NSC. 70/

NSAM 328, the product of the NSC meetings of 1-2 April 1965,
had its primary focus on air action against the DRV and Laos. In

67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
