Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"These governments represent the great majority of the
people of Khmer and Iao, the aspirations of whom they symbolize..." 6/

‘French forces alone were to withdraw from Cambodia and Laos;
the Pathet Lao and Free Khmer were not "foreign" troops. As in Vietnam,
elections then would be held -- but, without neutral or international
supervision. During these elections, Dong insisted there must be "condi-
tions securing freedom of activity for patriotic parties, groups, and
social organizations...," agreement to which would have guaranteed the
functioning with impunity of various communist fronts.

f. The Initial DRV Demands are Excessive

Viet Minh ambitions in Indochina, it must be concluded, were
not simply oratorical gestures intended strictly for the establishment of
a bargaining position. In the absence of Sino-Soviet pressure and the
threat of U.S. participation, it seems clear that the DRV would not have
reduced their demands. Viet Minh ambitions were extensive and partially
realized. They were, however, excessive and contrary to the compromise
mood of their communist allies and to the relatively firm Western posi-
tion. .

2. later DRV Positions Represent a Compromise

a. The DRV Begins to Soften Its Position

The implacable DRV position ran contrary to Chinese and
Soviet desires to forestall American intervention in Indochina, and after
as early gesture of unity, it was soon evident that the large communist
powers were bringing pressure to bear on the DRV. By 17 May, Pham Van
Dong was ready to withdraw from his strong position requiring a political
settlement before a cease-fire, and also to give up his demands for seating
Khmer and Pathet Lao delegations, although he still insisted that recog-
nition of these two movements was a part of the Vietnam solution:

"As regards procedure, /Dong stated that/ his delegation
was in full accord with the Soviet proposal that both political
and military questions be dealt with together. He also agreed.
to treating the military questions first not because they were
more important but more urgent. The questions of Khmer and.
Pathet Lao were closely linked to that of Vietnam and could not
be separated. He did not see any real question [sic] for con-
sidering first the question of Khmer and Pathet Tao." 7/

This softening of the DRV position at Geneva was not reflected in the
military operations in Indochina, where the Viet Minh were still deter-
mined to achieve control of as much of the Tonkin Delta as possible; in
fact, the Viet Minh were planning heavier operations in the Tonkin Delta.
A captured document in the last days of May directed Viet Minh commanders

c-8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
