Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

After BARREL ROLL, U.S. pressure upon North Vietnam was notably increased
by the FLAMING DART attacks of 7-12 February following the Pleiku incident.
The McGeorge Bundy group (MacNaughton, Cooper, Unger and Bundy) were in
Saigon at the time. On the return trip to Washington shortly after Pleiku,
the group drafted a memorandum for the President, Intended to reflect the
consensus of policy discussions with the Mission, the memorandum really
reflects Bundy's point of view, particularly in presentation of a rationale
for ROLLING THUNDER operations - soon to begin. Analysis of this memo and
the ROLLING THUNDER annex is part of another report in this series, For
present purposes it is sufficient to note that the memo reported the situa-
tion in Vietnam was deteriorating and said defeat was inevitable unless

the United States intervened military by bombing the North to persuade
Hanoi to cease and desist. South Vietnam was to be rescued not by measures
in South Vietnam but by pressures against the North,

The idea that victory could be achieved quickly was explicitly dis-
missed: perhaps "the next year or so" would be enough to turn the tide,
And this, hopefully, could be accomplished by the persuasive power of
aerial bombardment, :

ROLLING THUNDER was to be a program of sustained, continuous, increas-
ing reprisal beginning at a low level and becoming increasingly violent.
The level of violence would vary according to the North Vietnamese response:
if they persisted in infiltration, violence would continuously increase; if
they reduced their meddling, we would respond in kind and degree,

This subject had been discussed at considerable length in Saigon.
The Bundy memorandum was followed by a cable from Taylor which presented
generally similar recommendations under the heading of "graduated reprisals."
CINCPAC commented on the Taylor proposals, urging that the levels of attack
should be forceful enough to be militarily effective, not merely politically
persuasive. On 8 February, McNamara requested the JCS to develop a
program; shortly thereafter they produced their "Hight-week~-Program" of
bombing.

In Saigon, the FLAMING DART bombings of 7-12 February -- the first
reprisal bombings since August 1964 -- were promptly followed by the
Armed Forces Council selection on 16 February of a new cabinet; headed
by Dr. Pham Huy Quat, the cabinet was installed on 18 February. Another
coup was attempted on 19 February but thwarted by the AFC, And General
Khanh (whose actions against Huong in January had lost him Taylor's con-
fidence) was removed on the 20th, Four days later, 2h February, Khanh
left for foreign parts and ROLLING THUNDER began. Any positive correla-
tion between U.S. pressure on North Vietnam and the stability of the GVN
remained to be established,

During these first two months of 1965 almost no progress was made
toward increasing RVNAF strength. Goals were raised but actual force

- 103 ‘ TOP SECRET - Sensitive
