Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Option A

This would basically consist of accepting the Wheeler-
Westmoreland recommendation aimed at sending roughly 100,000
men by 1 May, .and another 100,000 men by the end of 1968.

This course of action is assumed to mean no basic change
in strategy with respect to areas and places we attempt to
hold. At the same time, the option could include some shift
in the distribution of our increased forces, in the direction
of city and countryside security and to some extent away
from “search and destroy" operations away from populated
areas.

The option basically would involve full presentation
to the Congress of the total Wheeler/tWestmoreland package,
with all its implications for the reserves, tax increases,
and related actions.

At the same time, there are sub-options with respect
to the negotiating posture we adopt if we present such a
total package. These sub-options appear to be as follows:

Option A-1: Standing pat on the San Antonio
formula and on our basic position of what would be accept-
able in a negotiated settlement.

Option A-2: Accompanying our presenting the
announcement with a new "peace offensive" modifying the
San Antonio formula or our position on a negotiated
settlement, or both. ;

Option A-3: Making no present change in our
negotiating posture, but making a strong noise that our
objective is to create a situation from which we can
in fact move into negotiations within the next 4 - 8
months if the situation can be righted.

Option B

The essence of this option would be a change in our
military strategy, involving @ reduction in the areas and
places we sought to control. It might involve withdrawal
from the western areas of I Corps and from the highland
areas, for example. The objective would be to concen-
+rate our forces, at whatever level, far moré heavily on
the protection of populated areas. Again, there are
sub-options, roughly as follows: .

155 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
