Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET. - Sensitive

11. January 1965: Prelude to the Bombing

The first week of January was filled with comings and goings
with the issue of the HNC's dissolution still unresolved. The Embassy
supported Huong publicly and privately, but stopped short of threatening
U.S. withdrawal and admitted indirectly to Huong that the U.S. might be
forced to accept military govermment. Then on January 7, the generals backed
off slightly and reached a compromise solution, which they announced Janu-
ary 9 amid rumors of a military takeover. The Armed Forces Council and
Khanh agreed to release the HNC prisoners and to continue backing civilian
goverment, referring to their August promises; the civilian GVN would
convene a new civilian group to legislate and write a new constitution,
preparatory to Assembly elections. Taylor saw the statement before its
release, and accepted itas the best available compromise. It was
followed by a stetement agreed on January 11 to patch up us/GVN relations,
at which time Khanh agreed also to put several of the Young Turks in the
cabinet. ‘The crisis seemed to be over. 76/

However, the end was not yet in sight. The Buddhists started ©
demonstrating and demanding that Huong resign. On January 14, Taylor
reacted to Khanh's proposals on the new cabinet by suggesting that he was
moving with unseemly haste. Taylor received a complete cabinet list on
Jenuary 18, and Khanh conferred with Westmoreland on the effects of cabi-
net roles for the generals on the 19th. Cabinet installation was scheduled
for the 19th. However, at almost the last minute Khanh asked for postpone-
ment of the cabinet installation, saying afterward that Huong had defaulted
on promises to change some of the civilian ministers. Leading Buddhists
went on another hunger strike, and a new crisis built up; in Hue the USIS
building was sacked and burned, and the USIS building in Saigon was sacked.
On the 24th, they demanded that all Vietnamese businessmen, night clubs,
ete., refuse to sell to Americans, and a majority apparently complied.

On the 25th, Khanh, having allied himself with the Buddhists, told Deputy
Ambassador Johnson that Huong and President Suu wanted to resign and let the
military take over, as demanded by the Buddhists. Johnson replied that

the Buddhists must not be allowed to veto the government, and that the
military mast not take over. Tt

Then on January 27, the AFC voted no confidence in the Suu-Huong
government and directed Khanh to take charge and resolve the crisis.
Taylor's comments to State made it clear that events were entirely out
of his control; again he objected to the means and to the timing of the
military return to power. When he raised the possibility of non-recognition,
State authorized him to use his own judgment but advised him to play along
with Khanh for the time being, while scouting around for fresh options,
Although Suu was technically ousted, he stayed on at Khanh's request; and
Oanh again became acting Prime Minister. 78/

In the midst of the crisis Westmoreland obtained his first
authority to use U.S. forces for combat within South Vietnam. Arguing
thet the VC might go for a spectacular victory during the disorders, he
asked for and received authority to use U.S. jet aircraft in @ strike role

63. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
