Blum

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

indispensable French, on the one hand, and the indigenous,
weak and divided Vietnamese, on the other hand, we have not
been able fully to reconcile these two allies in the interest
of a single-minded fight against Communism. Of the purposes
which we hoped to serve by our actions in Indochina, the one
that has been most successful has been the strengthening of
the French military position. On the other hand, the Viet-
namese, many of whom thought that magical solutions to their
advantage would result from our appearance on the scene, are
chastened but disappointed at the evidence that America is
not omnipotent and not, prepared to make an undiluted effort
to support their point of view... Our direct influence on
political and economic matters has not been great. We have
been reluctant to become directly embroiled and, though the
degree of our contribution has been steadily increasing, we
have been content, if not eager, to have the French continue
to have primary responsibility, and to give little, if any,
advice.” 4a/

concluded that:

"The situation in Indochina is not satisfactory and
shows no substantial prospect of improving, that no
decisive military victory can be achieved, that the Bao Dai
government gives Little promise of developing competence
and winning the loyalty of the population ... and that the
attainment of American objectives is remote." 43/

Shortly before his death in 1965, Blum held that a clash

of French and U.S. interests was inevitable:

"We wanted to strengthen the ebility of the French to
protect the area against Communist infiltration and invasion,
and we wanted to capture the nationalist movement from the
Communists by encouraging the national aspirations of the
local populations and increasing popular support of their govern-
ments. We knew that the French were unpopular, that the war
that had been going on since 1946 was not only a nationalist
revolt against them but was an example of the awakening self-
consciousness of the peoples of Asia who were trying to break
loose from domination by the Western world. We recognized
right away that two-pronged policy was beset with great
difficulties. Because of the prevailing anti-French feeling,
we knew that any bolstering by us of the French position would
be resented by the local people. And because of the traditional
French position, and French sensitivity at seeing any increase
of American influence, we knew they would look with suspicion
upon the development of direct American relations with local
administrations and peoples. Nevertheless, we were determined
that our aid program would not be used as a means of forcing

A-28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
