Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The hostility of the Annamese toward the Freneh began to mount
to its present intensity when the French en June 1 announced the
inauguration of the Provisional Government of the Republic of
Cochinchina. -\nnimese leaders had long emphasized their view that
the inclusion of Cochinchina in Viet Nam was a matter of life and
death to their conniry. Cochinchina, it may be mentioned, contains
the important mereantile cities of Saigon and Cholon, includes the
mouths of the Mekong, and is the richest province in Tndochina.
Called the Southern Province by the Viet Namese, it is racially in-
distinct from Tonkin and Annam. Statements by the French that the
referendum in Cochinchina (as pledged in the March 6 convention)
would still be held failed to reassure Viet Nam leaders, who pointed
out that such a referendum could not possibly be fair owing to the sup-
pression by the French of pro-Viet Nam political parties and of all
anti-French opinion, SEA’s information tends to substantiate this
point of view.

Tension between the French and the Annamese reached its present
pitch when the French on August 1 convened a conference at Dalat
(in southern Annam) to which the Royal Governments of Cambodia
and Laos, the Government of the autonomous Republic of Cochin-
china, and the native peoples of southern Annam and high plateau
of Indochina (but vo? Viet Nam, recognized by the French as part of
the Indochina Federation and French Union) to send delegates to
“study the fiamework of the French Union”. Subsequently pub-

‘lished agenda of the conference indicated that the salient aspects of
the Indochina Federation would also be deliberated. Asan immediate
result of this conference, the Viet Nam delegation which had been
discussing the future relation between France and Viet Nem with the
representatives of the French at Fountainebleau since July 6 an-
nounced that they were suspending negotiations until the French
should haye cleared up the “equivocal” situation which had been
created. The head of the Viet Nam delegation, who had opened the
conference with a violent blast against French policies, charged that
the French were now trying to engineer their own statute for the
Indochinese Federation and their own seftlement of the status of
Cochinchina and other areas claimed by Viet Nam. The view of
Consul Saigon is not very different. Te gave as his opinion that a
front against Viet Nam was in the making, that the states partici-
pating in the Dalat Conference were at least tacitly recognized as.
free states by the French, and that France and these free states are
now determining the status of the Indochinese federation without
reference to Viet Nam. In lis view if indicated double-dealing on
the part of the French, and he reported that the French Commissioner
for Cochinehina had forced the issue by threateniig to resien unless
his policy is carried out, Nothing las been said at the conference
about a refereudimn. Finally, Consul Saigon added that he had
learned that representatives of the southerm regions of the Province
of Annam (which has always been claimed by Viet Nam) will peti-
tion for inchision of their teritories in Cochinchina. In view of the
completeness of the agenda of the Dalat Conference, which covers
the essential frunework of the Indochinese federation, and in view
of the deliberate exclusion of Vief Nam from the conference, the
conclusion is inescapable that the French are endeavoring to whittle
down Viet Sam and to settle the future form of oreanization of Tndo-
china with those who may be expected to be amenable to French
influence.

CONFIDENTIAL

os!
>
