19h)

1945

196

1947

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Adopted the name "Ho Chi Minh" (He Who Enlightens). Still
leader of Viet Minh, Ho became a member of Central Committee --
and temporary Chairman -- of Dong Minh Hoi (Vietnam Revolu-
tionary League). Both groups received support from China and
U.S. Ho returned to Tonkin clandestinely, devoting efforts

_to the Viet Minh.

Ho operated in the jungles in North Vietnam. He constantly
sought aid from the U.S. through the 0.8.8.

May 1945 established liberated zone of six provinces in Tonkin
and was visited by U.S. officer of 0.8.8. In June, Ho called
for National Congress, but convening was postponed to August 16
at Tan Trao. Viet Minh program:

(1) disarm Japs before Allied entry
(2) wrest power from enemy
(3) be in authority to receive Allied forces.

August 19, Governor fled, Bao Dai abdicated, and few days
later National Liberation Committee proclaimed "provisional
government" with Ho Chi Minh president.

September 2, Ho Chi Minh declared independence of Vietnam
Democratic Republic.

(British land in Saigon-Chinese enter Hanoi.)

On November 11, Ho dissolved ICP and formed Marxist Study
Group. Ho wrote to President Truman in October and November.

Appealed to U.S., U.K. USSR and China in February. Wrote
letters to President Truman on 16 and 18 February.

Ho formed "coalition" government under Chinese occupation on
March 2, 1946. Exercised personal prestige to gain acceptance
6 March 1946 Agreement providing for French replacement of

| Chinese in Tonkin.

| Ho at Dalat Conference in May, and Fontainebleau, France, in
| August, failed to produce negotiated settlement of differences

with French. On 11 September, Ho told U.S. Ambassador Caffrey
in Paris that he was not a communist. Ho signed modus vivendi
on 14 September following breakdown of Fontainebleau talks,
and returned to Hanoi.

French seized local government in Haiphong and Langson in
November. DRV armed forces attacked French in Hanoi on 19
December 1946. Ho moved DRV government into mountains.

On April 30, Ho relinquished the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
to his Socialist Under Secretary. Ho had Vietnam government
reshuffled twice to form broadest coalition possible against
French and to avoid "extremist" label by foreigners.

(French negotiated with Bao Dai to split resistance. )

et TOP SECRET - Sensitive
