Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

bombing of South Vietnsm, North Vietnam infiltrated over
86,000 men in 1966. At the same time, it has also built

up the strength of its armed forces at home, and acquired
sufficient confidence in its supply and logistic organization
to equip vc/1VA forces in South Vietnam with*a modern family
of imported 7.62mm weapons which require externally supplied
ammunition. Moreover, NVN has the potential to continue
puilding the size of its armed forces, to increase the
yearly total of infiltration of individual soldiers and
combat units, and to equip and supply even larger forces

in South Vietnam for substantially higher rates of com-

bat than those which currently prevail.

Since the beginning of the Rolling Thunder air strikes
on NVN, the flow of men and materiel from NVN to SVN has
greatly increased, and present evidence provides no basis
for concluding that the damage inflicted on North Vietnam
by the bombing program has had any significant effect on
this flow. In short, the flow of men and materiel from
Worth Vietnam to the South appears to reflect Hanoi's

intentions rather than capabilities even in the face of

ee ae re eee

the bombing.

NVN's ability to increase the rate of infiltration of
men and materiel into SVN is not currently limited by its
supply of military manpower, by its LOC capabilities, by the
availability of transport carriers, or by its access to
materiels and supplies. The vc/NVA are effectively limited
by constraints of the situation in the South -- including the
capacity of the VC infrastructure and distribution system to
support additional materiel and troops -- but even given these
constraints could support a larger force in the South. The
inference which we have drawn from these findings is that
NVN determines and achieves the approximate force levels that
they believe are needed to sustain a war of attrition for an
extended period of time.

Despite heavy attacks on NVN's logistic system, manu-
facturing capabilities, and supply stores, its ability to
sustain the war in the South has increased rather than
decreased during the Rolling Thunder strikes. It has
become increasingly less vulnerable to aerial interdiction
aimed at reducing the flow of men and materiel from the
North to the South because it hasmade its transportation
system more redundant, reduced the size and increased the
number of depots and eliminated choke points.

.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
12h
