Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in such a manner as to reflect well upon the officials giving

it. The President's trips to the provinces have appeared to be
carefully ‘laid on' by local officials. The President himself
cannot be absolved entirely from the blame, however, since his
system of personal rule which permits direct appeal from the
individual provincial authorities to himself, in a sort of intra-
executive check and balance system, serves to further weaken the
administrative apparatus.

"Recently, however, as indicated in the subsequent section
on 'GVN Reactions', the Vice President and others who are not
his usual informers on security matters have spoken frankly with
him and he now seems well aware of the situation.

(b) Provincial and district authorities exercise almost
autonomous control in the areas under their jurisdiction. Too
often the personnel holding these positions have been incompetent,
having been chosen for reason of party loyalty. Moreover, some
have tended to view their jobs as a means to personal advancement
or financial gain often at the cost of the population under their
control. Press editorials have attacked local officials for
extorting money from peasants, using torture to wring false con-
fessions from innocent people and conducting themselves in such
@ manner as to reflect adversely on the prestige of the national
government. In addition rumors continue to circulate among the
population concerning the alleged nefarious activities of and
favoritism shown to members of the Can Lao party. While officials
have been largely unable to identify and put out of commission
Viet Cong undercover cadres among the population, they have often
arrested people on the basis of rumors or of denunciations by
people who harbor only personal grudges. Police powers justified
on the basis of the needs of internal security have reportedly
been misused to extort money notonly from the peasants but from
land owners, merchants and professional people in the towns. This
misuse of police powers and the kind of broad scale arrests on
suspicion are weakening the support of the population for the regime.
On the other hand, the application of swift, summary justice (such
as the Special Military Tribunals were created to hand out) designed
to protect the population against the Viet Cong threat, if care-
fully administered and ‘advertised’ as such, can do much to restore
a feeling of security;

(c) While the GVN has made an effort to meet the economic
and social needs of the rural populations through community develop-
ment, the construction of schools, hospitals, roads, etc., these
projects appear to have enjoyed only a measure of success in creating
support for the government and, in fact, in many instances have
resulted in resentment. Basically, the problem appears to be that
such projects have been imposed on the people without adequate

LT TOP SECRET - Sensitive
