a

rr ee

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

all parties again flouted U.S. wishes freely, stopping short only when

the U.S. used force and the credible threat of force to oppose them. The
maneuverings of the various political groups seemed to surprise the Embassy
repeatedly. The same problems arose in the GVN cabinet split and crisis
just before the Manila Conference in October 1966. The blandly naive
language of the "Blueprint for Vietnam" in lete 1967, unmodified by any
pack channel elaboration, offered no hope of any foreseeable improvement.

The MACV Role

The MACV organization played an important, mostly hidden, role in
U.S.-GVN relations. At every level from Saigon to the districts, the
advisory structure was the most pervasive instrument of intergovernmental
contact. ARVN officers were accustomed to being spoon-fed military advice;
so when military dominance of GVN brought these same officers to high posi-
tions in goverment, the advisor relationship conferred a latent diplomatic
role upon MACV. Advisors were used as channels of communications on political
and pacification matters. (On occasions such as the attempts to get Thi to
meet Ky or to leave the country, senior MACV officers openly became diplo-
matic emissaries.)-

We have less record than we would like of COMUSMACV's influence. He
reported regularly to his military seniors only on strictly military matters.
Detailed reports of his routine, daily dealings with counterparts were not
required of MACV as they were of the Embassy.

From time to time, COMUSMACV revealed his own independent objectives.
He sought protection of the ARVN officer corps from unfavorable press stories
in order to preserve their solidarity and morale; he pressed zealously for
the rapid build-up of U.S. ground forces; he opposed encadrement and combined
command with ARVN; he rejected sanctions against ARVN; he objected to the
initial constraints on the use of American forces and wanted to be free to
operate independently of ARVN.

General Westmoreland's strong position usually assured that his view
prevailed. Extension of advisors, increased MAP resources, and the build-
up of U.S. ground forces enhanced his relative position. By October 1966,
MACV had numerical superiority of forces over Regular RVNAF; by late 1967,
MACV had over 400 square miles of bases. His freedom from detailed reporting
of daily contacts was itself an element of strength. When he received un-
wanted advice and directives, he set up studies, and, after a time, proceeded
as usual. This tendency was most notable in the case of leverage, already
noted, and combined command. Likewise, MACV successfully resisted taking
over the bulk of Saigon Port operations, despite pressure from Washington,
and delayed for about a year the move to take division commanders out of the
pacification chain of command. Another instance of MACV independence showed
up when Rusk and Lodge wanted to keep U.S. men and equipment out of the
confrontation between GVN and the Struggle Movement in I Corps, but they
failed to tell MACV about it. On April 5, MACV went ahead and airlifted
two battalions of Vietnamese Rangers to Danang; after that Lodge put a stop
to it. : :

v TOP SECRET - Sensitive
