Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

EISENHOWER ADMINISTRATION
SUMMARY

President Eisenhower took office in the context of negotiations
for.a settlement in Korea and the portending defeat in France in Indo-
china. His Administration early faced the crisis surrounding the Geneva
Conference of 1954, in which direct U.S. intervention in Vietnam was a
distinet prospect. Having pressed diplomatically for a constructive
outcome at Geneva, the United States threw its support behind Ngo Dinh
Diem and the Government of Vietnam. With U.S. support, that government,
despite a series of severe tests, succeeded in consolidating itself and
making significant progress. U.S. justification for its policy toward
Vietnam in this period included the following:

a. The "domino principle": the loss of Vietnam, the most vulner-
able state of Southeast Asia, would imperil the other nations of the
region, and ultimately lead to a seriously weakened U.S. strategic
position. Vietnam was a key to continued free world access to the
human and material resources of Southeast Asia.

b. Communist China was pursuing an expansionist foreign policy
relying upon subversive aggression, as well as armaments. China thus
continued to reflect the unchanging Soviet objective of conquest of the
world, and both had manifest designs on Southeast Asia.

c. The United States proposed, through its aid programs, to help
the smell and weak nations contiguous with communist powers to maintain
their freedom and independence lest aggression and expansion be en-
couraged, and the world moved thereby toward a third world war.

d. In the words of President Eisenhower, "We gave military and
economic assistance to the Republic of Vietnam. We entered into a
treaty -- the Southeast Asia Security Treaty -- which plainly warned
that an armed attack against this area would endanger our own peace and
safety and that we would act accordingly."

e. U.S. aid for Vietnam -- economic and military -- has made
possible not only its survival, but also genuine progress toward a
stable society, a modern economy, and internal and external security.
