Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

hk. The Viet Minh

In 1954, the Viet Minh controlled some 60 to 90 percent
of South Vietnam's villages (by French estimates) and 30 to 40 percent
of its territory (by U.S. estimates). 8/ The bulk of organized Viet
Minh forces were located in Annam and the Highlands, proximate to
Tonkin, and in regions free of competition from the armed sects. In
Cochinchina, they were militarily strongest in areas along the Cambodian
border and in the Camau peninsula of the extreme south remote from the
principal concentrations of people. 9/ Nonetheless, their political
organization was pervasive, and in some localities, e-g-, Quang Ngai
province in Annam, the Viet Minh were the only effective government.
A hierarchy of Viet Minh committees paralleled the formal government
from the village Administrative and Resistance Committee (ARC) through
district, province, and what the Viet Minh termed "interzone" or
"region." No reliable estimates exist of the numbers of cadres involved
in this apparatus, but Viet Minh military forces of all types south of
the 17th parallel probably numbered around 100,000. 10/ When orders
were issued for the Geneva regroupment, the ">rovisional assembly areas"
designated coincided with the areas in which Viet Minh strength had been
greatest. During the time allowed for-collecting forces for the move
north, the Viet Minh evidently undertook to bank the fires of revolution
by culling out of their units trained and. reliable cadres for "demobiliza-
tion," "recruiting" youth -- forcibly in many instances -- to take their
place, and caching weapons. 11/ Particularly in Annam and the Highlands,
then, the Viet Minh posed a significant challenge to Ngo Dinh Dien. His
test of strength with the Viet Minh, however, was to be deferred by the
Geneva Settlement and DRV policy for some years.

5. Anti-colonialism

The political prospects of Ngo Dinh Diem when he accepted
the premiership from Bao Dai were dimmed not only by Viet Minh residue,
and by the existence of the armed sects, but by the taint of colonialism.
As far as most Cochinchinese peasants were concerned, Diem was linked to
Bao Dai, and to the corrupt, French dominated government he headed.
Studies of peasant attitudes conducted in recent years have demonstrated
that for many, the struggle which began in 1945 against colonialism con-
tinued uninterrupted throughout Diem's regime: in 1954, the foes of
nationalists were transformed from France and Bao Dai, to Diem and the
U.S. ~~ My-Diem, American-Diem, became the universal term of Viet Cong
opprobrium -- but the issues at stake never changed. 12/ ‘There was,
moreover, some substance to the belief that Diem represented no change,
in that, although Ngo Dinh Diem took office before the Geneva Settlement
as prime minister with "full powers civil and military," he did not
acquire actual administrative autonomy until September, 1954; proclaim
independence until January, 1955; or take command of his army until
February, 1955. 13/ There was perforce a significant carry-over of

9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
