Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

initiative that "Program 4-plus" forces will permit,

to move on with pacification efforts and with the
national election in September, and to lay the ground-
work by periodic peace probes, perhaps suggesting secret
' talks associated with limitation of bombing and with a
view to finding a compromise involving, inter alia, a
role in the South for members of the VC.

This alternative would not involve US or Vietnamese
forces in any numbers in Laos or Cambodia, and definitely
not in North Vietnam. Since the US Reserves would still
be untapped, they would still be available for use later
in Asia, or elsewhere, if it became necessary.

Bombing Program

The bombing program that would be a part of this
strategy is, basically, a program of concentration of
effort on the infiltration routes near the south of
North Vietnam. The major infiltration-related targets
in the Red River basin having been destroyed, such inter-
diction is now best served by concentration of all effort
in the southern neck of North Vietnam. All of the sorties
would be flown in the area between 17° and 20°. This
shift, despite possible increases in anti-aircraft capa-
bility in the area, should reduce the pilot and aircraft
loss rates by more than 50 per cent. The shift will, if
anything, be of positive military value to General West-
moreland while taking some steam out of the popular effort
in the North.

The above shift of bombing strategy, now that almost
all major targets have been struck in the Red River basin,
can to military advantage be made at any time. It should
not be done for the sole purpose of getting Hanoi to
negotiate, although that might be a bonus effect. To
maximize the chances of getting that bonus effect, the
optimum scenario would probably be (1) to inform the
Soviets quietly that within a few days the shift would
take place, setting no time limits but making no promises
not to return to the Red River basin to attack targets
which later acquire military importance (any deal with
Hanoi is likely to be midwifed by Moscow); (2) to make
the shift as predicted, without fanfare; and (3) to
explain publicly, when the shift had become obvious,

162 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
