Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to do his part. ‘Thirdly, while gaining time for Khanh, we
must be able to hold the DRV in check and restrain a further
buildup of Viet Cong strength by way of infiltration from

the North. Finally, throughout this period, we should be
developing a posture of maximum readiness for a deliberate
escalation of pressure against North Vietnam, using January 1,
1965, as a target D-Day. We must always recognize, however,
that events may force us to advance D-Day to a considerably
earlier date..."

"Tn approaching the Khanh Government, we should express
our willingness to Khanh to engage in planning and eventually
to exert intense pressure on North Vietnam, providing certain
conditions are met in advance. In the first place before we
would agree to go all out against the DRV, he must stabilize
his Government and make some progress in cleaning up his
operational backyard. Specifically, he mist execute the
initial phases of the Hop Tac Plan successfully to the ex-
tent of pushing the Viet Cong from the doors of Saigon.

The overall pacification program, including Hop Tac, should
progress sufficiently to allow earmarking at least three
division equivalents for the Defense in I Corps if the DRV
step up military operations in that ares.

"Finally, we should reach some fundamental understandings
with Khanh and his Government concerning wer aims. We must
make clear that we will engage in action against North Viet-
nam only for the purpose of assuring the security and inde-
pendence of South Vietnam within the territory assigned by
the 1954 agreements; that we will not repeat not join in a
crusade to unify the North and South; that we will not re-
peat not even seek to overthrow the Hanoi Regime provided
the latter will cease its efforts to take over the South by
subversive warfare.

"With these understandings reached, we would be ready
to set in motion the following:

(1) Resume at once 34A (with emphasis on Marine opera-
-tions) and Desoto patrols. These could start without await-
ing outcome of discussions with Khanh.

(2) Resume U-2 overflights over all NVN.

(3) Initiate air and ground strikes in Laos against
infiltration targets as soon as joint plans now being worked
out with the Khanh Government are ready...”

"Before proceeding beyond this point, we should raise
the level of precautionary military readiness (if not already
done) by taking such visible measures as introducing U.S.
hawk units to Danang and Saigon, landing a Marine force

.

.

36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
