Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Those who made such proposals were in favor of some kind of authorized,
premeditated use of leverage, of course, else they would not have pushed
for an examination of this hitherto avoided topic.

When operational groups -- as distinct from policymakers who
could defer when to implement -~ urged the adoption of leverage measures —
the recommendetions tended to be summarily struck down. In 1966, for
instance, an inquiry by the MACV staff into the poor performance records
of the 5th and 25th ARVN Divisions -~ both stationed near Saigon --
concluded that if other measures failed to improve these units, COMUSMACV
should withdraw U.S. advisors and Military Assistance Program (MAP) sup-
port. General Westmoreland deleted from the study the recommendation for
the withdrawal of MAP support. He further directed that sanctions against
ARVN be avoided. ‘The U.S, 1st and 25th Infantry Divisions were instructed
to assist the two ARVN divisions and to increase their own participation
in pacification operations in Binh Duong and Hau Nghia Provinces. 181/
It was clear that the time was not ripe for action; there was no agreed
basis upon which action might be taken.

But another Army staff effort, the PROVN Study referred to earlier,
set out to rectify this omission. Commissioned in mid-1965 by Army Chief
of Staff General Harold K. Johnson, the PROVN group Was charged with
"developing new sources of action to be taken in South Vietnam by the
United States and its allies, which will, in conjunction with current
actions, modified as necessary, lead in due time to successful. accomplish~
ment of U.S. aims and objectives." After eight months of intensive effort
this select group of middle ranking officers produced a comprehensive
argument calling for emphasis on the pacification effort. <A radical
decentralization of U.S, and GVN directive authority was held to be
necessary for this purpose. And to make sure that national plans were
turned into concrete actions at the operating level, PROVN called for the
calculated use of leverage:

The situation in South Vietnam has seriously deteri-
orated. 1966 may well be the last chance to ensure eventual
success. 'Victory'can only be achieved through bringing
the individual Vietnamese, typically a rural peasant, to
support willingly the GVN. ‘The critical actions are those
that occur at the village, district, and provincial levels.
This is where the war must be fought; this is where that
war and the object which lies beyond it must be won.’ The
following are the most important specific actions required
now:

-~ Concentrate U.S. operations on the provincial level
to include the delegation of command authority over
U.S. operations to the Senior U.S. Representative at
the provincial level.

95 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
