Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

present burden include: (1) a settlement with the communists
in Indochina; (2) an agreement to internationalize the action
in, Indochina; (3) reduction of the NATO obligatioris of France.

22. A settlement based on.a military armistice would be
more complicated in Indochina than in the case of Korea. Much
of ‘Indochina is not firmly under the control of either side,
but subject to. occasional forays from both. Areas controlled
by the opposing sides are interspersed, and lines of contact
are fluid. Because of the weakness of the native governments, /
the dubious attitudes of the population even in areas under /
French control, and the certainty of continued communist
pressure, it is highly probable that any settlement based on
a withdrawal of French forces would be tantamount to handing
over Indochina to communism, The United States should there-
fore continue to oppose any negotiated settlement with the
Viet Minh. c

23- In the event that information and circumstances point
to the conclusion that France is no longer prepared to carry
the burden in Indochina, or if France presses for a sharing of
the responsibility for Indochina, whether in the UN or directly
with the U.S. Government, the United States should oppose a
French withdrawal and consult with the French and British con-
cerning further measures to be taken to safeguard the area
from communist domination, In anticipation of these possi-
bilities, the United States should urgently re-examine the
Situation with a view to determinings:

a. Whether U.S. participation in an international
undertaking would be warranted. :

. b. The general nature of the contributions which
the United States, with other friendly governments, might
be prepared to make,

24. A cessation of hostilities in Korea would greatly
increase the logistical capability of the Chinese Communists
to support military operations in Indochina. A Korean peace
would have an even more decisive effect in increasing Chinese
air capabilities in that area. Recent intelligence reports
indicate increased Chinese Communist military activity in the
Indochinese border area. If the Chinese Communists directly
intervene with large forces over and above those introduced as
individuals or in small units, the French would probably be
driven back to a beachhead around Haiphong. The French should
be able to hold this beachhead for only a limited time at best
in the absence of timely and substantial outside support,

ANNEX TO NSC 124 : TOP SECRET

7.
