Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"FOR THE SECRETARY, SECDEF AND KOMER
"NODIS

"]. Herewith I transmit our recommendations carrying out
your 83699 and 85196. This is the best we can do in the imme-
diate future and we think it is a forward step. But I believe
that you may wish to change it as we advance along this untrod
path and learn more about circumstances and people. Our propo-
sal is as follows:

' “a, The establishment of an office of operations,
headed by @ Director of Opsrations. This headquarters office
of operations will include the present staff of: (1) USAID/
Field Operations; (2) USAID/Public Safety; (3) USATD/Refugees;
(4) JUSPAO/Field Services (minus North Viet-Nam branch); (5)
CAS/Cadre Operations Division. The Office of Operations will
be organized so that the above offices will not necessarily re-
main intact when they are merged into a single office. For
example, I intend to disband USAID/FO's cadre office, and put
those people now representing AID on cadre affairs directly un-
der the cadre office. Thus there may be a net saving in man-
power.

"bh. Al other divisions of AID and JUSPAO will remain
under the control of their respective directors -- MacDonald
and Zorthian -- who will be responsible to Porter, as they are
now, for their operations. (I exempt from this the special
question of press relations, on which Zorthian will continue
to report to me directly.) ‘Thus, for example, MacDonald will
continue to oversee to Agriculture, Education, Health, Industry,
etc., Divisions, as well as continue, along with the economic
counselor Wehrle, to be responsible for the anti-inflation ef-
forts. ‘The Director of USAID will be freed from responsibilities
for the field operations, but his job continues to be one of
vast importance. I think it will now become more manageable.

kX *

"a. At province level we will select a single civilian
to be in charge of 11 other U.S. civilians in the province,
in same way as MACV senior advisor is responsible for the mili-
tary inyolyed in the advisory effort in the province. This
senior civilian representative will be the U.S. counterpart
for civilian effairs to the Vil province chief and, together with
the MACV senior advisor (sector) and the province chief, will
form the provincial coordinating committee. The practice of
assaulting the province chief with a multiplicity of advisors,
often giving conflicting advice, should cease under this arrange-
ment. The senior civilian representative will write the effi-
ciency reports of the American civilians in the province,

-

11h
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
