Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the U.S. investment in Da Nang is as apparent to the
vc/DRV as it is to us. With a strong mobile force in the
area providing a tight defense of the airfield complex and
good security of U.S. outlying installations, I believe that
two ancillary benefits will emerge. First, the RVNAF will
be encouraged to use the forces thus freed for patrol and
security operations, and second, the VC/DRV will be obliged
to regard Da Nang as a tougher target. Finally, the
Ambassador rejects the usefulness of U.S. ground elements

in a counter-guerrilla war because of our color, armament,
equipment and training. This stands athwart past performance
in this function. The Marines have a distinguished record in
counter-guerrilla warfare." 7/

The JCS forwarded to the Secretary of Defense the ; BYOB EEECE of CINCPAC's
recommendations in JCSM-130-65. 8/

D. Contingent Approval

On 26 February the State Department cabled Ambassador Taylor that
the Marines were on the way, and that he was to secure approval from the
Government of Vietnam for their deployment to Da Nang. 9/ Ambassador
Taylor cabled the State Department in reply on 28 February and said:

"After discussion of Ref A with Johnson and Throckmorton
(Westmoreland was temporarily unavailable), we have decided
to proceed as following.

"T shall seek an appointment with Quat at first oppor-
tunity (probably tomorrow March 1) and raise the matter of
our concern (but not alarm) over the security of the Da Nang
airfield and environs along following lines. It is the most
important military installation in the country which is
indispensable in air defense and in support of air and sea
operations against the DRV. It must be at or near the top
of the target list which the VC/DRV wish to destroy. I
visited Da Nang on February 27 for the first time in several
months and am deeply impressed with the increasing magnitude
of the security problem as are General Westmoreland and his
principal military colleagues.

"Except for the chronic shortage of GVN forces in I
Corps, we would be inclined to urge GVN to allocate several
additional battalions to the Da Nang area. But we know that
such forces could not be made available except as prohibitive
cost to the security of other areas in SVN. For these
reasons, we are driven to consider a solution which we have
always rejected in the past, the introduction of US ground
combat forces to reinforce the defense of Da Nang until GVN _
forces become available for the purpose. In spite of many

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
