Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the extent that fear of ground troop involvement dominates
our political responses to Asia in Congress or elsewhere,

it seems most desirable to me to allay those paralyzing
fears in confidence, on the strength of the individual
statements made by leaders consulted on this trip. This
does not minimize or disregard the probability that open
attack would bring calls for U.S. combet troops. But the
present probability of open attack seems scant, and we might
gain much needed flexibility in our policies if the spectre
of combet troop commitment could be lessened domestically.

6. Any help -- economic as well as military -~ we give less
developed nations to secure and maintain their freedom must
be a part of a mutual effort. These nations cannot be saved
by United States help alone. To the extent the Southeast
Asien nations ere prepared to-take the necessary measures to
make our aid effective, we can be -- and must be -- unstint-
ing in our assistance, It would be useful to enunciate more
clearly than we have -- for the guidance of these young and
unsophisticated nations -- what we expect or require of them.

7- In large measure, the greatest danger Southeast Asia offers
to nations like the United States is not the momentary threat
of Communism itself, rather that danger stems from hunger,
ignorance, poverty and disease. We must -~ whatever strate-
gies we evolve -- keep these enemies the point of our attack,
and make imeginative use of our scientific and technological
capebility in such enterprises.

8. Vietnam and Thailand are the immediate-and most important-
trouble spots, critical to the U.S. These areas require the
attention of our very best talents -- wnder the very closest
Washington direction -- on matters economic, military and
political,

The basic decision in Southeast Asia is here. We must decide
whether to help these countries to the best of our ability or
throw in the towel in the srea and pull back our defenses to
San Francisco and fa] "Fortress America" concept. More important,
we would say to the world in this case that we don't live up to
treaties and don't stend by our friends. This is not my concept.
I recommend that we move forwerd promptly with a major effort to
help these countries defend themselves. I consider the key here
is to get our best MAAG people to control, plan, direct and exact
results from our military aid program. In Vietnam and Thailand,
we must move forward together.

a. In Vietnam, Diem is a comolex figure beset by many
problems. He has admirable qualities, but he is remote from the

56 -
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
