7

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

National pacification plan would be marginal. I+t would
probably be incapsble of galvanizing the people to the
heightened level. of unity and sacrifice necessary to carry
forward the counter-insurgency program to final success.
Instead, it would look increasingly to the United States

to take the major responsibility for prying the Viet Cong and
the North Vietnamese off the backs of the South Vietnamese
population. The politicians in Saigon and Hue feel today
that the political hassle is their appropriate arena: ‘The
conflict with the VC belongs to the Americans.

"We may, therefore, expect to find ourselves faced with
a choice of (A) passively watching the development of a popu-
lar front, knowing that this may in due course require the
U.S. to leave Vietnam in failure; or (B) actively assuming
increased responsibility for the outcome following a tine-
schedule consistent with our estimate of the limited via-
bility of any South Vietnamese government.

"An examination of our total world responsibilities and
the significance of Vietnam in relationship to them clearly
rules out the option of accepting course (A). If we leave
Vietnam with our tail between our legs, the consequences
of this defeat in the rest of Asia, Africa and Latin America
would be disastrous. We therefore would seem to have little
choice left except to accept course (B).

"Our previous views on the right course of action to
follow in South Vietnam are set forth in EMBTEL 465. ‘The
discussion-in this present cable amounts to a recognition
that course of action A repeat A of EMBTEL 465 no longer
corresponds with the realities of the situation. Recent
events have revealed the weakness of our ally and have con-
vinced us of the improbability of attaining the level of
governmental performance desired under course A before em-
barking on a campaign of pressure against the DRV. We are
forced back on course of action B with certain revised views
on timing.”

He went on to recommend that escalating pressures on the DRV begin around
December 1. 30/ . :

Taylor brought with him General Westmoreland's assessment of the
military situatiqn; it included a look at the political situation from a
completely different viewpoint from Taylor's:

"sel. In preparation for your trip to Washington,
I thought it might be useful to give you my assessment of the
military situation. In subsequent paragraphs I outline in
some detail the rather substantial progress which we have

- 13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
