Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

to our ow people and to the people of Vietnam. Too often in
the past we have conveyed the impression that we expect an
early solution when those who live with this war know that no
early solution is possible. It is our own belief that the
people of the United States have the necessary will to accept
and to execute a policy that rests upon the reality that there
is no short cut ‘to success in South Vietnam."

Appended to the Bundy memorandum as Annex A is a detailed, care-
fully formulated explanation of his "sustained reprisal” policy, including
specific action recommendations. Because of its explicitness and clarity,
it is reproduced in full:

"A POLICY OF SUSTAINED REPRISAL
"T, Introductory

"We believe that the best available way of increasing our chance of
success in Vietnam is the development and execution of a policy of
‘sustained reprisal against North Vietnam -- a policy in which air and
naval action against the North is justified by and related to the whole
Viet Cong campaign of violence and terror in the South.

"While we believe that the risks of such a policy are acceptable, we
emphasize that its costs are real. It implies significant U.S. air losses
even if no full air war is joined, and it seems likely that it would
eventually require an extensive and costly effort against the whole air
defense system of North Vietnam. U.S. casualties would be higher -- and
more visible to American feelings -- than those sustained in the struggle
in South Vietnam.

rs

"Yet measured against the costs of defeat in Vietnam, this program
seems cheap. And even if it fails to turn the tide -- as it may -- the
value of the effort seems to us to exceed its cost.

"TT. Outline of the Policy

"1. In partnership with the Government of Vietnam, we should develop
and exercise the option to retaliate against any VC act of violence to
persons or property. ry

"2, In practice, we may wish at the outset to relate our reprisals
to those acts of relatively high visibility such as the Pleiku incident.
Later, we might retaliate against the assassiaation of a province chief,
put not necessarily the murder of a hemlet official; we might retaliate
against a grenade thrown into a crowded cafe in Saigon, but not neces-
sarily to a shot fired in a smell shop in the countryside.

"3, Once a program of reprisals is clearly underway, it should not
be necessary to connect each specific act against North Vietnam to a

35 POP SECRET - Sensitive
