Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of view, this is clearly what General de Gaulle described
to me as a "rotten country."

Politically, South Viet-Nam is a lost cause. The
country is bled white from twenty years of war and the
people are sick of it. The Viet Cong -- as is shown by
the Rand Corporation Motivation and Morale Study -- are
deeply committed.

Hanoi has a Government and 4 purpose and a discipline.
The "government" in Saigon is a travesty. In a very real
sense, South Viet-Nam is a country with an army and no

government.

In my view, a deep commitment of United States forces
in a land war in South Viet-Nem would be a catastrophic
error. If ever there was an occasion for a tactical with-
drawal, this is it. 5/

Ball's argument was perhaps most antithetic to one being put
forward at the same time by Secretary of State Rusk. In a memorandum
he wrote on 1 July, Rusk stated bluntly: "The central objective of
the United States in South Viet-Nam must be to insure that North Viet-
Nam not succeed in taking over or determining the future of South
Viet-Nam by force. We must accomplish this objective without a general
war if possible." 6/ Here was a statement that the American commit-
ment to the Vietnam war was, in effect, absolute, even to the point
of risking general war. The Secretary went on to explain why he felt
that an absolute commitment was necessary:

The integrity of the U.S. commitment is the principal
pillar of peace throughout the world. If that commitment
becomes unreliable, the communist world would draw conclusions
that would lead to our ruin and almost certainly to a catas-
trophic war. So long as the South Vietnamese are prepared to
fight for themselves, we cannot abandon them without disaster
to peace and to our interests throughout the world.

In short, if "the U.S. commitment” were once seen to be unreli-
able, the risk of the outbreak of general war would vastly increase.
Therefore, prudence would dictate risking general war, if necessary,
in order to demonstrate that the United States would meet its commit-
ments. In either case, some risk would be involved, but in the latter
case the risk would be lower. The task of the statesman is to choose
among unpalatable alternatives. For the Under-Secretary of State,
this meant an early withdrawal from Vietnam. For the Secretary, it

meant 2n open-ended commitment.

*

8 | TOP SECRET - Sensitive
