Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(or TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2 The Intelligence Community Demurs

There was no immediate action on the November 1965 JCS
recommendations, but they were taken under study. Secretary McNamara
asked for intelligence evaluations, and on 27 November and 3 December,
respectively, he received special reports from the Board of National
Estimates on (a) U.S. air attacks on NVN petroleum storage facilities,
and (b) a generally stepped-up effort involving doubling or tripling
U.S. troop commitments, bombing military and industrial targets in the
Hanoi /Haiphong area, and mining NVN harbors. 12/

The Board reported that strikes against POL targets in
the Hanoi/Haiphong area would represent "a conspicuous change in the
ground rules" which the U.S. had hitherto observed, but would not
appreciably change the course of the war:

-..the Communists would unquestionably regard the
proposed US attacks as opening a new stage in the war, and
as a signal of US intention to escalate the scale of con-
flict....We do not believe, however, that the attacks in
themselves would lead to a major change of policy on the
Communist side, either toward negotiations or toward enlarging
the war.... 13/

The strikes would cause strains and embarrassment but would not have a
major military or economic impact:

Hanoi would not be greatly surprised by the attacks.
Indeed...it has already taken steps to reduce their impact.
It has developed some underground storage facilities, and
some capacity for dispersed storage in drums....We believe
that the DRV is prepared to accept for some time at least
the strains and difficulties which loss of the major POL
facilities would mean for its military and economic activity.
Tt is unlikely that this loss would cripple the Communist
military operations in the South, though it would certainly
embarrass them. 1)

NVN might possibly ask the Chinese to intervene with fighter aircraft

to help defend the targets but would probably not ask for ground troops.
The Chinese would probably decline to intervene in the air and would not
volunteer ground forces, though they would urge NVN to continue the war.
‘The Soviets would be "concerned" at the prospect of a further escalation
of the bombing: :

The Soviets would find their difficulties and frustra-
¢ions inereased....They are committed to provide defense
for North Vietnam, and...their inability to do so effectively

68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
