Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
B, "Operation Sunrise"

The first operational effort in which the U.S. had a hand,
"Operation Sunrise," got under way in Binh Duong Province on 22 March 1962
when work commenced on Ben Tuong, the first of five hamlets to be con-
structed for relocated peasants in the Ben Cat District in and around the
Lai Khe rubber plantation, (See Map a.) Phase I of the operation -- the
military clearing phase -- was conducted by forces of the 5th ARVN Divi-
sion reinforced by ranger compenies, a reconnaissance company, two rein-
forced CG@ companies, and a psychological warfare company. The Viet Cong
simply melted into the jungles.

With the Viet Cong out of the way -~- at least for the time being --
the relocation and construction of the new hamlet commenced. The new
program got off to a bad start. The government was able to persuade only
seventy families to volunteer for resettlement. The 135 other families in
the half dozen settlements were herdéd forcibly from their homes. 8h./
Little of the $300,000 in local currency provided by USOM hed reached the
peasants; the money was being withheld until the resettled families indi-
cated they would not bolt the new hamlet. Some of them came with most of
their meager belongings, Others had little but the clothes on their backs,
Their old dwellings -- and many of their possessions ~- were burned behind
them. 85/ Only 120 males of an age to bear arms were found among the more
than 200 families -- indicating very clearly thet a large number had gone
over to the VC, whether by choice or as a result of intimidation.

-C. Other Early Programs

Progress in Binh Duong continued at a steady pace, beset by diffi-
culties. By midsummer 2900 persons had been regrouped into three strategic
hamlets. 87/ Elsewhere, the pace quickened, Although the Delta Plan, as
a coordinated effort, had not been implemented by the summer of 1962,
Secretary McNamara found in May an eggressive effort under wey without U.S,
help near Ca Mao:

Here the commander of the 3lst Infantry Regiment had gone
into an area 95% controlled by the VC, declared martial law, and
resettled 11,000 people (some under duress) in 9 strategic hamlets,
while fighting the VC wherever he found them, Since inception
of the progrem, none of his villages have been attacked, and the
freedom from VC taxation (extortion) is proving most appealing to
the people. It is the commander's hope (doubtless optimistic)
that he will be able to turn the whole area over to the civil guard
and self defense corps within 6 months. 88/

These resettlement efforts in areas which had been under VC domination
were not the extent of the early hamlet "program," however. Many exist-
ing hamlets and villages were "fortified" in one degree or another early
in 1962 following no discernible pattern. This appears to have been the
natural product of the varied response to Nhu's injunction to emphasize
strategic hamlets. In April, the GVN Ministry of the Interior informed
the U.S. that 1300 such hamlets were already completed. 89/ "Operation
Sunrise” had by this time been broadened to embrace efforts in several
provinces. 90/ Several other Strategic Hamlet Programs were begun:
"Operation Hai Yen II" (Sea Swallow) in Phu Yen Province with a goal of
281 hamlets, 157 of which were reported.as completed within two months:

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
