Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

simultaneously, to broaden U.S. participation in the hope of bringing

about necessary reforms in Diem's regime. The President's emissary rejected
the alternatives of a military takeover which would make the generals
dominant in all fields. He rejected, too, the alternative of replacing
Diem with a weaker figure who would be willing to delegate authority to

both military and civil leaders. 22/ The first course would emphasize

the solution to only one set of problems while slighting others; the

second would permit action, but not coordinated action.

B.. "Limited Partnership"

In order to move in a coordinated way on the intermingled military,
political, economic, and social problems facing South Vietnam, General
Taylor recommended that the U.S. initiate a "limited partnership" which
would stop short of direct U.S, action but would also, through persuasion
at many levels judiciously mixed with U.S, leverage, "...force the Viet-
namese to get their house in order in one area after another." 23/ In-
creased material assistance from the U.S. would be accompanied with increased
U.S. participation at all levels of government in which the American advisors
must "...as friends and partners -- not as arms-length advisors -- show
them how the job might be done -- not tell them or do it for them." If
strongly motivated, tactful Americans were assigned primarily outside
Saigon, thus avoiding the establishment of large headquarters not actually
engaged in operational tasks, Taylor thought that this increased U.S.
participation would not be "counter-productive"; e.g., lend substance to
claims of U.S. imperialism and dominance of the Diem Government. au/

Thus, Taylor consciously opted for a U.S. course of action in which
the major thrust of effort would be to induce Diem to do the things that
the U.S. thought should be done: to draw the disaffected into the national
effort and to organize and equip so that effective action would be possible.
General Taylor did not argue explicitly that success would follow automatic-
ally if Diem's practices could be reformed and his operational capabilities
upgraded, but he implied this outcome. The question of an overall strategy
to defeat the insurgency came very close to being regarded as a problem
in the organization and management of resources. Since GVN had no national
plan, efforts were concentrated on inducing them to produce one. There was
much less concern about the substance of the non-existent GVN plan. It
was almost as though there had to be something to endorse or to criticize
before substantive issues could be treated as relevant.

C. U.S.-Proposed National Plans

This priority of business is reflected in the U.S. plans which
were proposed to GVN for adoption by the latter. In late 1960 the U.S.
Country Team in Saigon produced an agreed "“Counterinsurgency Plan for
Viet-Nam" (CIP). The plan was an attempt to specify roles and relation-
ships within GVN in the counterinsurgency effort, to persuade Diem to
abandon his bilineal chain of command in favor of a single command line
with integrated effort at all levels within the government, and to create
the governmental machinery for coordinated national planning. 25/ EG

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
