Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

(2) A deeply-felt conviction of the need to restore unity to the
American nation.

For a policy from which so little was expected, a great deal was
initiated. The North Vietnamese and the Americans sat down at the
conference table in Paris to begin to travel the long road to peace; the
issue of Vietnam largely was removed from American political discord;

a limit to the commitment of U.S. forces was established; and the South
Vietnamese were put on notice that, with our help, they would be expected
+o do more in their own defense.

The "A to Z" reassessment of U.S. strategy in South Vietnam in the
wake of the TET offensive did not result in the announcement of a new
ground strategy for South Vietnam. But in placing General Westmoreland's
request for forces squarely in the context of the achievement of U.S.
political-military objectives in South Vietnam, the limited political
nature of those objectives was for the first time affirmed. A new ground
strategy, based on these limited objectives and wpon the ceiling on U.S.
troops became a corollary for the new U.S. commander.

American forces initially were deployed to Vietnam in order to prevent
the South Vietnamese from losing the war, to insure that aggression from
the north would not succeed. Having deployed enough troops to insure that
NVN aggression would not succeed, it had been almost a reflex action to
start planning on how much it would take to "win" the war. Lip service
was given to the need for developing South Vietnamese political institu-
tions, but no one at high levels seemed to question the assumption that
U.S. political objectives in South Vietnam could be attained through mili-
tary victory.

However, it was quickly apparent that there was an embarrassing lack
of knowledge as to how much it would take to win the war. This stemmed
from uncertainty in two areas: (1) how much effort the North Vietnamese
were willing to expend in terms of men and materiel; and (2) how effective
the South Vietnamese armed forces would be in establishing security in the
countryside. As the war progressed, it appeared that our estimates of the
former were too low and of the latter too high. However, committed to a
military victory and having little information as to what was needed mili-
tarily, the civilian decision makers seemed willing to accept the field
commander's estimate of what was needed. Steady progress was promised
and was apparently being accomplished, although the commitment of forces
steadily increased.

The TET offensive showed that this progress in many ways had been
illusory. The possibility of military victory had seemingly become remote
‘and. the cost had become tco high both in political and economic terms.
Only then were our ultimate objectives brought out and re-examined. Only
then was it realized that a clear-cut military victory was probably not
possible or necessary, and that the road to peace would be at least as

92 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
