Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Option B-l: Such a change in strategy, with
no increase or minimal increase in forces.

Option B-2: Such a change in strategy accom-
panied by a substantial increase in forces, although
possibly less than the totals indicated. in the Wheeler-
Westmoreland proposals.

Option C:

This might be called the "air power" or "greater
emphasis on the North" option. It would appear to fit
most readily with an Option B course of action in the
South, but would mean that we would extend. our bombing
and other military actions against the North to try to
strangle the war there and put greater pressure on
Hanoi in this area. 26/

Three other options were also offered but carried no specific proposals
for the air war or the negotiations track.

These generalized options took on more specific form when
Bundy examined possible Soviet and Chinese reactions. Among the possible
U.S. actions against North Vietnam, he evaluated mining the harbors,
all-out bombing of the North, and invasion. These were the Soviet
responses he anticipated:

3. Mining or Blockade of DRV Ports. This is a pros-
pect the Soviets have dreaded. Mining, in particular, is
a tough problem for them because it would not readily per-
mit them to play on our own worries about escalation.

They could attempt to sweep the mines which we would then
presumably resow. They could somehow help the DRV in
attacking US aircraft and ships engaged in the mining
operation, even if this was occurring outside territorial
waters, but such operations, apart from risking fire-
fights with the US, do not seem very promising. Blockade,
on the other hand, confronts the Soviets with the choice
of trying to run it. They might decide to try it in the
hope that we would stand aside. They would almost cer-
tainly authorize their ship captains to resist US inspec-
tion, capture or orders to turn around. What happens next
again gets us into the essentially unknowable. In any
case, however, it is unlikely that the Soviets would attempt
naval or DRV-based air escorts for their ships. Naval
escort would of course require the dispatch of vessels from
Soviet home ports. On balance, but not very -confidently,

T would conclude that in the end the Soviets would turn
their ships around, & highly repulsive possibility for

156 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
