Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

751G.00/6-1752: SECRET FILE

SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

ee DEPARTMENT OF STATE
THE SECRETARY
June 17, 1952

Following his telephone conversation with Sir Oliver Franks today,
which is reported separately, the Secretary saw General Bradley and
Mr. Perkins, Later Sir Oliver dropped in at the office following a
meeting in Mr. Jessup's office, He asked if he could see the
Secretary for a few minutes to get the further report on the matter
of talks on Southeast Asia. He repeated what he told us earlier that
he had had a second message from London following the report which the
Embassy had sent of Mr, Perkins' conversation with Mr. Steele.

The Secretary said that he had talked about this matter with
General Bradley this afternoon and that Friday was the only day
which General Bradley could possibly meet and that was very inconvenient
for Mr. Acheson, He said, therefore, he thought that any talks were
impossible to arrange, He then said that he would be glad to talk
to Sir Oliver right at that moment and see where we stood,

The Secretary reviewed the situation and the talks which took
place in Paris. He said that in the earlier meetings which had taken
place on Southeast Asia, everyone had started from a different
point and there had been little in the way of conclusion reached,

He said that he felt what was needed now was political decisions,

The Secretary then analyzed the situation as we saw it, He:said
that if the Chinese came into Indochina in force, we would have to
do something. We could not remain passive, He said that none of the
things we could do were very pleasant ones and we felt that a warning
was highly lesirable, He said that we felt we should not give a
warning, however, if there had been no agreement on what we did in
the event the Communists moved in anyway. He said this would make us
look very silly and would weaken the effect of any other warnings,

SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

515
