Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

stop the grave deterioration of the political situation. Nolting left
Vietnam permanently in mid-August with vague assurances from Diem that
he would seek to improve the climate of relations with the Buddhists.
Less than a week later, Nolting was betrayed by Nhu's dramatic August 21
midnight raids on Buddhist pagodas throughout Vietnam

One of the important lessons of the American involvement in South
Vietnem in support of Diem was that a policy of unreserved commitment to
a particular leadership placed us in a weak and manipulable position on
important internal issues. The view that there were "no alternatives”
to Diem greatly limited the extent of our influence over the regime and
ruled out over the years a number of kinds of leverage that we might use-
fully have employed or threatened to emply. Furthermore, it placed the
U.S. in the wnfortunate role of suitor to a fickle lover. Aware of our
fundamental commitment to him, Diem could with relative impunity ignore
our wishes. It reversed the real power relationship between the two coun~
tries. Coupled with Diem's persistent and ruthless elimination of all po-
tential political opposition, it left us with rather stark alternatives
indeed when a crisis on which we could not allow delay and equivocation
finally occurred. For better or worse, the August 21 pagoda raids decided
the issue for us.

The raids, themselves, were carefully timed by Nhu to be carried out
when the U.S. was without an Ambassador, and only after a decree placing
the country under military martial law had been issued. They were conducted
by combat police and special forces units taking orders directly from Nhu,
not through the Army chain of command. The sweeping attacks resulted in
the wounding of about 30 monks, the arrest of over 1,400 Buddhists and
the closing of the pagodas (after they had been damaged and looted in the
raids). In their brutality and their blunt repudiation of Diem's solemn
word to Nolting, they were a direct, impudent slap in the face for the U.S.
Nhu expected that in crushing the Buddhists he could confront the new U.S,
Ambassador with a fait accompli in which the U.S. would complainingly ac-
quiesce, as we had in so many of the regime's actions which we opposed.
Moreover, he attempted to fix blame for the raids on the senior Army gener-
als. Getting word of the attacks in Honolulu, where he was conferring
with Nolting and Hilsman, Lodge flew directly to Saigon. He immediately
let it be known that the U.S. completely dissociated itself from the raids
and could not tolerate such behavior. In Washington the morning after,
while much confusion reigned about who was responsible for the raids, 4
statement repudiating them was promptly released. Only after several
days did the U.S. finally establish Nhu's culpabili in the attacks and
publicly exonerate the Army.

On August 23, the first contact with a U.S. representative was made
by generals who had begun to plan a coup against Diem. The generals wanted
a clear indication of where the U.S. stood. State in its subsequently con-
troversial reply, drafted and cleared on a weekend when several of the
principal Presidential advisors were absent from Washington, affirmed that
Nhu's continuation in a power position within the regime was intolerable

Vii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
