Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Another indication of what may have transpired in the
June 8 meeting is an unsigned outline for a policy paper (probably
done in Bundy's office) in McNaughton's files. This ambitious docu-
ment suggests that U.S. goals in the conflict include leaving behind
a stable, democratic government; leaving behind conditions of stable
peace in Asia; persuading the DRV to give up its aggression; and
neutralizing the internal security threat in the South. All this to
be done without creating an American satellite, generating anti-
American sentiment, destroying the social fabric in the South or
alienating other countries. 157/ Strategies considered to achieve
the objectives included the Westmoreland plan for 200,000 men with a
reserve callup (10 disadvantages listed against it); limiting the
increase to 30,000 men but without a reserve callup; "enough US forces
to operate effectively against provincial main force units and to
reinforce I Corps and the DMZ area," with a reserve callup; and no
change from current force levels. Options against North Vietnam
included: (A) expanded air attacks on military, industrial and LOC
targets including mining the harbors; (B) stopping the bombing north
of the 20th parallel except for restrikes; (C) invasion; and (D) the
barrier. The section ends cryptically, "Our over-all strategy must
consist of a combination of these." 158/ ‘The last paragraph of the
outline deals with the intended strategy against the North:

--.the object is to cut the North off from the South
as much as possible, and to shake Hanoi from its obdurate
position. Concentrate on shaking enemy morale in both the
South and North by limiting Hanoi's ability to support the
forces in South Viet-Nam.

a. A barrier, if it will work, or

b. Concentrate bombing on lines of communication
throughout NVN, thus specifically concentrating on infil-

’ tration but not running into the problem we have had and
will have with bombing oriented towards ‘strategic’ targets
in the Hanoi/Haiphong area. By continuing to bomb through-
out NVN in this manner we would indicate neither a lessening
of will nor undue impatience. 159/

The broad outlines of the eventual decision on bombing that would emerge
from this prolconged debate are contained in this cryptic outline in

early June.

At Defense, McNaughton began once again to pull together
2 DPM for McNamara, this time devoted exclusively to the air war. A
June 12 version preserved in Mcllaughton's files appears to be the final

69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
