Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~- Sensitive

- Iv. Nsam-328

Near the end of March Ambassador Taylor returned again to Washington
for policy conferences, Four sets of proposals had been specifically
developed for consideration at the 1 April meeting, One of these was
General Johnson's report which has already been described in detail.
Another was a suggested program of 12 covert actions submitted by the
Director of Central Intelligence, A third was an information program de-
veloped by USIS. The fourth was a proposed program of 41 non-military
measures initially suggested, by Ambassador Taylor, then worked on by State
during the third week of March, and finally incorporated in a memorandum
to the President dated 31 March.

The 41 possible non-military actions proposed for consideration by
Ambassador Taylor were arranged in 9 groups. The first group was entitled
"Decentralization In The GVN and The Rural Program." This group included
measures to urge the GVN to increase the power and responsibility of indi-
vidual province chiefs, and to persuade the peasants they had a stake in
the GVN by giving rural pacification a positive label, "new rural life
hamlet program," and complexion,

The second group of non-military actions concerned "Youth, Religion,
and Other Special Groups." Within this group were a series of actions to
expand the support of the GVN Ministry of Youth and Sports, to reduce the
draft age from20 to 180r 17, to persuade the GVN to meet Montagnard griev-
ances, and to increase aid to the Vietnamese labor movement.

Under the heading "Economic and Social Measures," there were specific
proposals to support a better coastal water transportation system and to
urge the GVN to promulgate and put into effect an equitable land reform
program. By sending U.S. and possibly nationalist Chinese experts it was
hoped the GVN could be assisted in combating the growing VC capability to
extract financial and material support from GVN resources. Measures were
also urged to expand and accelerate slum clearance and low cost housing in
troublesome urban areas and to improve the water supply.

Specific measures advocated under the heading "Education" included a
general increase in U.S, assistance, expansion of the program to translate
American textbooks into Vietnamese and to establish secondary schools on
American principles for Vietnamese students,

Among the five specific measures undér the rubric "Security and Intel-
ligence," one urged promulgation of an effective arrest and detention law,
another asked for a great increase in intelligence funds, a third called
_ for a system of rewards for information leading to the capture or death of
VC leaders, and the last was a suggestion for a national counterespionage
organization.

110 — TOP SECRET - Sensitive
