Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

DEPT concurs fully with Paris and Saigon that forma-
tion of NATL army; at least in Vietnam and possibly to
lesser extent in Laos and Cambodia, is action which ap-
proaches ciosesjto these requirements while still remain~
ing within realm of possibility.

We are, nevertheless, conscious of complexity of
technical and other problems involved in accomplishing
task and aware that it might be matter of years before
armies actually exist in usual sense. We, therefore, are
seeking means whereby psychological benefits of action
may begin to be harvested IMMED even though full realiza-
tion must, in fact, be delayed. The FOL plan is therefore
submitted for your study, comment and discussion with ap-
propriate Fr authorities’ and possibly Bao Dai.

1) At earliest moment it be solennly (and simul-
taneously) declared by FR (Aurbol?) and Bao Dai that in
keeping with provisions of March & Accords, Vietnam NATL
Army under command of Mmperor will become fact and that
ali indigenous troops then serving in FR Union forces are
incorporated into new NATL Army.

2) That pursuant to ART 3 of Mar 8 Accords it is-de-
clared that a state of RATL emergency exists and that His
Majesty as Commander in Chief has therefore placed IATL
forces under command of FR High Command in tke face of
threat of FON invasion.

3) That FOL emergency NATL Army will be released from
service under #R command to resume fundamental task of
assuring internal order, etc., and that in meanwhile offi-
cer and NCO training vrogram will proceed.

These are bare outlines which if found feasible may
later be enlarged to include invitation to other partisan
forces to join colors, provide for Viet staff officers on
FR staff, devise progrem for replacement FR officers by
Viets, etc.

In suggesting such a plan DEPT does not seek to
oversimplify problem or overlook drawbacks. It is realized
that for the time being this will only be a paver transfer
which will be SUBJ to customary Viet criticism of another

TOP SECRST

345
