Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The President then responded to the remarks of Thang and Freeman by urg-
ing "511 of you connected with our program...to give very special atten-.
tion to refugee camps and the schools in the refugee camps." 9/ He then
turned to Minister Ton and David Bell for a discussion of the economic
situation. Then Secretary Gardner, who had co-chaired a working group

on health and education -- the distinction between rural construction and
the health/education programs was not clarified -- made his remarks. He
set out perhaps the most clearly-defined objectives of the session (except
for the economic negotiations), describing the new contract with the AMA
for training personnel, the new goal for provincial medical teams, and the
plans for a new medical logistics system. In large part his goals were
more specific than those of the other working group because the USAID
Public Health Chief in Saigon, Major General James Humphries, had already
laid groundwork for an excellent program of health services and assistance,
and Gardner was able to work from a specific plan,

Gardner went on to discuss education, where his goals and objectives
were less clear, and the President asked several detailed questions, con-
eluding by asking General Ky to ask the Ambassador to request an educa-
tional team to go to Saigon after the agricultural team headed by Secretary
Freeman returned.

The Vietnamese then thanked the Americans for the conference, and in
turn some of the senior members of the American delegation -- in order,
Admiral Sharp, Leonard Marks, General Wheeler, Ambassador Lodge, Ambassa-
dor Harriman -- made brief statements about the meaning of the conference.
The President then made his final statement:

",..Preserve this communique, because it is one we don't
want to forget. It will be a kind of bible that we are going
to follow. When we come back here 90 days from now, or six
months from now, we are going to start out and make reference
to the announcements that the President, the Chief of State and
the Prime Minister made in paragraph 1, and what the leaders
and advisors reviewed in paragraph 2...You men who are respon-
sible for these departments, you ministers, and the staffs
associated with them in both governments, bear in mind we are
going to give you an examination and the finals will be on just
what you have done.

"In paragraph 5; how have you built democracy in the rural
areas? How much of it have you built, when and where? Give us
dates, times, numbers.

"In paragraph 2; larger outputs, more efficient production
to improve credit, handicraft, light industry, rural electri-
fication -~ are those just phrases, high-sounding words, or have
you coonskins on the wall... :

Ta TOP SECRET - Sensitive
