Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

tones, the second FLAMING DART operation constituted a sharp break
with cue US policy and set the stage for the continuing fer eg
program that was now to be launched in earnest.

14 peorenoas in Advocacy. While all bus one or two of the
President's principal Vietnam advisors favored the initiation of a
sustained bombing program, there were significant differences among
them. McGeorge Bundy and Ambassador Maxwell Taylor, for example,
both advocated a measured, controlled sequence of raids, carried
out jointly with the GVN and directed solely against DRV military
targets and infiltration routes. In their view, the intensity of
the attacks was to be varied with the level of VC outrages in SVN
or might be progressively raised. But whereas McGeorge Bundy's
objective was to influence the course of the struggle in the South
(boosting GVN morale, improving US bargaining power with the GVN,
exerting a depressing effect on VC cadre), Ambassador Taylor's
principal aim was"to bring increasing pressure on the DRV to cease
its intervention." It was coercion of the North, rather than a
rededication of the GVN to the struggle in the South that Taylor
regarded as the real benefit of a reprisal policy. CINCPAC, on
the other hand, insisted that the program would have to be a very
forceful one -- a "graduated pressures" rather than a "graduated
reprisal" philosophy -- if the DRV were to be persuaded to acceed
to a cessation on U.S. terms. The Joint Chiefs, in turn, (and
especially Air Force Chief of Staff General McConnell) believed
that the much heavier air strike recommendations repeatedly made
by the JCS during the preceding six months were more appropriate
than the mild actions proposed by Taylor and Bundy.

Initiating ROLLING THUNDER. A firm decision to adopt "a pro-
gram of measured and limited air action jointly with the GVN against
selected military targets in the DRV" was made by the President on
February 13, and communicated to Ambassador Taylor in Saigon. Details
of the program were deliberately left vague, as the President wished
to preserve maximum flexibility. The first strike was set for February
20 and Taylor was directed to obtain GVN concurrence. A semi-coup
in Saigon, however, compelled postponement and cancellation of this
and several subsequent strikes. Political clearance was not given
until the turbulence was calmed with the departure of General Nguyen
Khanh from Vietnam on Feb 25. U.S. reluctance to launch air attacks
during this time was further reinforced by a UK-USSR diplomatic
initiative to reactivate the Cochairmanship of the 1954 Geneva Con-
ference with a view to involving the members of that conference in
@ consideration of the Vietnam crisis. Air strikes executed at that
moment, it was feared, might sabotage that diplomatic gambit, which

‘ Washington looked upon not as a potential negotiating opportunity,
but as a convenient vehicle for public expression of a tough U.S.

: iv
; TOP SECRET - Sensitive
