Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Page
of Ho's communist contacts at this time is peculiar
when they are forcing collaboration or preparing
a puppet government; this ploy is a possible diversion
from French policy in Indochina. O'Sullivan 131 to
Byrnes, 3 December 1946. ........+-+6- fe es cl ee, eee Ou

Acheson instructs Moffat on Ho Chi Minh"’s communist

record and offers guidelines of U.S. policy in dis-

“cussion with Ho. Essentially, the U.S. is concerned

over Tonkin events, the American people have welcomed
Indochinese attainments but violence imperils this

sympathy, and U.S. is informing France similarly.

The U.S. is not making formal intervention at this

time. Acheson 305 to Saigon, 5 December 1946..........-.4+ 85

U.S. feels France would engage in full scale military

operations in Vietnam only if forced, since they

realize it is no longer possible to maintain a closed

door. However, Cochin-China political question must

be settled and French cannot resolve it without a

fight. The Cochin-Chinese prefer Tonkin to France.

Reed 472 to Byrnes, 6 December 19)6....... cnerensevernsecse Of

Secretary Byrnes reviews basic French-Vietnamese
difficulties for Missions at London, Moscow, and
Nanking. Essentially, the difficulties revolve
around deep nationalist sentiment and opposition
to the French, guided by a few communist trained
leaders in the government with apparent contacts
with Moscow and Yenan. However, "French influence
is important not only as an antidote to Soviet
influence, but to protect Vietnam and SEA from
future Chinese imperialism." Three basic troubles
are mutual distrust, French irresolution of the
term "free state," and Vietnamese intransigence.
Byrnes message to certain Missions, 17 December
GHG aceereik aes a east, See DRD ainisle CAE 18 pe eo Pei tee ate te EOS

Byrnes reviews recent French political crisis and

influence of Indochina policy as an important

factor. Outbreak of hostilities in Hanoi seen as

serious and not likely to be resolved by Moutet

and d'Argenlieu. Byrnes message to Moscow, Nanking

and ‘Saigon, 20) December! TOUG. wc. cccsles csusece cates eeesces GO

Vincent informs Acheson that with inadequate forces
and divided public opinion, the French have tried
to accomplish in Indochina what a strong, united
Britain found unwise to attempt in Burma. In short,
"euerrilla warfare may continue indefinitely." The

x TOP SECRET - Sensitive
