Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the United States, by constitutional process, with such
regional and other collective arrangements as are based
on continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, and
as affect its national security." 75/

That same month, Congress passed the Economic Cooperation Act, and in
July, 1948, opened negotiations for a North Atlantic Alliance. ‘The
North Atlantic Treaty was signed in April, 1949, and entered into
force in August of that year.

In the same omnibus foreign assistance legislation which had
authorized ECA in June, 1948, Congress had provided for a China Aid
Program. This measure met almost immediate failure, for Mao's armies
spread unchecked over the China mainland, and by mid-1949 the posi-
tion of the nationalists there was untenable. The "failure" of U.S.
aid -- which was termed such by Congressional critics -- no less
than the urgent situation in Europe and the exploding of the first
Soviet nuclear device in September, 1949, figured in Congressional
action on military assistance legislation. 76

On October 6, 1949, Congress passed the Mutual Defense Assist-
ance Program (MDAP) through which U.S. arms, military equipment and
training assistance might be provided world-wide for collective
defense. In the first appropriations under MDAP, NATO countries
received 76% of the total, and Greece and Turkey (not yet NATO mem-
bers), 16%. T/ But Korea and the Philippines received modest aid,.
and the legislators clearly intended the law to underwrite sub-
sequent appropriations for collective security in Asia. The opening
paragraph of the law not only supported NATO, but foreshadowed the
Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty:

"An Act to Promote the Foreign Policy and Provide for
the Defense and General Welfare of the United States

by Furnishing Military Assistance to Foreign Nations,
Approved October 6, 1949.

"Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa-
tives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
That this Act may be cited as the ‘Mutual Defense Assistance
Act of 1949.'

"PTNDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY
"The Congress of the United States reaffirms the policy of

the United States to achieve international peace and security
through the United Nations so that armed force shall not be

A-53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
