Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

As reported through military channels, VNAF is unable to
Fly today. Hence, there will be no ROLLING THUNDER Mission and.
no present need to see Quat. I am assured that VNAF will be
ready to go tomorrow, 14 March. .

With regard to the delays of ROLLING THUNDER VI, I have the
impression that we may be attaching too much importance to
striking target 40 because of its intrinsic military value as
a target. If we support the thesis (as I do) that the really
important target is the will of the leaders in Hanoi, virtually
any target North of the 19th parallel will convey the necessary
message at this juncture as well as target 40. Meanwhile, through
repeated delays we are failing to give the mounting crescendo to
ROLLING THUNDER which is necessary to get the desired results. 92/

When the strike finally came off, however, on March 14 and 15, it
was the most forceful attack on the North launched to date. 2h VNAF
Al-H's supported by US flak, CAP and pathfinder aircraft, struck weapon
installations, depots, and barracks on Tiger Island, 20 miles off the
North Vietnamese coast, and more than 100 US aircraft (two-thirds Navy,
one-third USAF) hit the ammunition depot near Phu Qui, only 100 miles
southwest of Hanoi. Some of the earlier hesitancy about bombing the
North was beginning to wear off. ;

C. President's Concern Over Insufficient Pressure in South Vietnam

While attention was being increasingly focused on pressures
against the North, disturbing assessments continued to come to the
President's attention concerning developments in the South. One such
estimate was Westmoreland's analysis, dated February 25, of the military
situation in the four corps areas. It was essentially in agreement with
a grave CIA appraisal issued the same day. Observing that the pacifica-
tion effort had virtually halted, Westmoreland foresaw in six months a
Seigon government holding only islands of strength around provincial and
district capitals that were clogged with refugees and beset with "end the
war" groups asking for a negotiated settlement. The current trend pre-
saged a Viet Cong take-over in 12 months, although major towns and bases,
with U.S. help, could hold out for years. To "buy time," permit pressure
on North Vietnam to take effect, and reverse the decline, he proposed
adding three Army helicopter companies, flying more close support and
reconnaissance missions, opening a "land line" from Pleiku in the high-
lands to the coast, and changing U.S, policy on the use of combat troops.
93/ There was now’ real concern at the highest Administration level that
the Vietnamese military effort might collapse in the South before pres-
sures on the North could have any significant impact. On March 2, there-
fore, the President decided to dispatch Army Chief of Staff General
Harold K. Johnson to Saigon with a high-ranking team. In an exclusive

‘message for Ambassador Taylor, Secretary McNamara described General
Johnson's mission as follows:

69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
