Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

links in their lines of communications, it is estimated
that they are capable of generating in the North and
infiltrat*ng to the South 4500 men a month and between

50 and 300 (an average of 200) tons a day depending on

the season. The insufficiency of the interdiction effort
ig obvious when one realizes that the 110 battalions of
PAVN (27) and vc (83) forces in Vietnam need only 20 or

so tons a day from North Vietnam to sustain "1964" levels
of activity and only approximately 80 tons a day to sustain
"light combat" (1/5th of the force in contact once every

7 days using 1/34 of their basic load). The expansion of
enemy forces is expected to involve the infiltration of

9 new PAVN and the generation of 7 new VC combat battalions
a month, resulting (after attrition) in a leveled-off force
of 155 battalions at end-1966. The requirements from the
North at that time -- assuming that the enemy refuses, as it
can, to permit the level of combat to exceed "light" --
should approximate 140 tons a day, less than half the dry-
season infiltration capability and less than three-quarters
the average infiltration capability.

5. The effective interdiction program. The flow

of propaganda and military communications cannot be
physically interdicted. But it is possible that the flow
of men and materiel to the crucial areas of South Vietnam
ean be. The interdiction can be en route into North Vietnam
from the outside world, inside North Vietnam, en route from
the North by sea or through Laos or Cambodia to South Viet-
nam, and inside South Vietnam. It can be by destruction or
by slow down. The effectiveness can be prolonged by ex-
hausting the North's repair capability, and can be enhanced
by complicating their communications and control machinery.
The ingredients of an effective interdiction program in
North Vietnam must be these:

a. Intensive around-the-clock armed recon-
naissance throughout NVN.

b. Destruction of the LOC targets heretofore tar
targeted.

s. Destruction of POL.
d. Destruction of thermal power plants.
e. Closing of the ports.

..eeIt has been estimated (without convincing back-up) that an
intensive progrem could reduce Hanoi's capability to supply

35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
