Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Diem did not involve himself directly in the managing of either the
Can Lao or the NRM. The former, as mentioned, was always the creature
of Nhu. WNhu also controlled the southern branches of the NRM, but in Annam
and portions of the Central Highlands the NRM was the tightly held instru-
ment of Ngo Dinh Can. Can brooked no opposition whatsoever; Nhu, more
confident in the regions where the Can Lao was most efficient, occasionally
permitted some political activity by minority groups, such as the Cao Dai
and Hoa Hao sects, and the Socialists. But that activity was tolerated
only so long as it was pro-Diem and supporting, rather than opposing, GVN
policy.

These were the ideas and the political apparatus by which Ngo Dinh
Diem sought to weld together a nation in the aftermath of Geneva. Their
narrowness, their inappropriateness for most Cochinchinese and Annamites,
virtually assured that the history of his regime, after its initial successes,
would become an almost unbroken record of alienation of one portion after
another of the Vietnamese body politic. This process of alienation accentu-
ated the failures of the Geneva Settlement, and ultimately led to Ngo Dinh
Diem's assassination.

C. Conflict with the Armed Sects

1. Defeat of the Binh Xxuyen

At the time he took office, Diem controlled scarcely a few
blocks of Saigon, the capital remaining firmly in the control of Bay Vien
and the Binh Xuyen. Beginning in September, 1954, Diem tried to divide
and conquer the sects. 45/ Four leaders from each of the religious sects
were brought into his cabinet in an effort to isolate the Binh Xuyen, and
with U.S. assistance he sought to integrate the sect forces into the national
army. He enjoyed some initial success in rallying Cao Dai forces, and con-
fident from assurances of direct American aid, he shut down, in January,
1955, the Binh Xuyen concessions in Saigon and Cholon. In the ensuing con-
frontation, the Binh Xuyen swung the Cao Dai and the Hoa Hao into a United
Front of Nationalist Forces, and, although French aid for their forces had
formally been withdrawn, continued to draw on French funds and advice.

On March 29, 1955, fighting broke in Saigon in which sections of the city
were burned. Although a truce was struck, the affair polarized relations
between Diem and the sects; between Diem and General Collins, whose advice
to conciliate he elected not to follow; and between the Americans and the
French, over the viability of Diem. Washington apparently decided at that
juncture to temporize with the sects, and to find an alternative to Diem. 46/
Before the instructions could be sent to Saigon, however, fighting was re-
newed. Even as the battle was joined, Bao Dai telegraphed orders to Dien
to travel to France. Diem disobeyed, and, convinced of his moral grounds
in attacking the Binh Xuyen, committed his forces to combat. His brother,
Nhu, coopted a "Revolutionary Committee" to confer emergency authority on
Diem. They were immediately successful, and by mid-May, 1955, the Binh
Xuyen had been driven into the Rung Sat swamp east of Saigon, and Bao Dai's
power in Saigon was broken. Bay Vien escaped to Paris.

18 ' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
