Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Lhe Assistant Chief of the Livision af Natiheust Asin Afuias (Lean-
don) to the Secretary of State

SECRETARY Satcox: Febrimry 4, 1946,
[Received February 5—5:05 p. m.]

War Series Saig 0927. Reference Wash 06067, Weare already in
position to shed some light on questions asked.

1. D'Argenlicu-Ho Chi Minh negotiations have in fact been going
on since November. These negotiations looking toward French recog-
nition of independence for Annamite to be worked out somewhat along
Philippine lines. T have no knowledge of period time contemplated.
Negotiations woud probably have been completed by now but for
Leclere raisine an objection. He told the \dmiral’s Council ‘hat if
these negotiations succeeded the French might as well leave Indochina
altovether. Tle recommended military reconquest and state[d]
HQS Army was all ready for it. Neverthe'ess negotiations were later
resumed and are continuing between IIo Chi Minh and Sainteny who
is French Commissioner for Tonkin, Tope they will be completed in
2 or 3 weeks.” ;

“This paragranh was reported hy the Department in its telegram 650, Feb-
ruary 7, 48, 1 p.m. to Paris. net printed.

9. There are no Chinese economic agreements with the Annaniites.

3. Reference Franco-Chinese agreements nothing formal yet.
Temporary and local agreements are as follows:

@. In north French pay in piastres for maintenance of Chinese
troops. These payments considered as advances on amounts French
are supposed to receive as war damage from Japanese.

6, Small part of these piastre advances is supposed to be used for
withdrawal of seme Chinese gold units al official rate.

e. Chinese Government advances gold units which are freely con-
yertible info Chinese nafional dollars for exnenses of French repre-
sentatives in Chungking, Kunming and Shanghai. Such advanees
are only fraction of amount French are paying for Chinese troops.

_ _d@, There is an agreement for exchange of Hanoi ceal for Cochin
China rice. Due to lack of shipping and troubles of various sorts
the volume of exchange under this agreement has been disappoint-
ingly low.

4. Clarac now in Chungking laying groundwork for important
agreements, Among other things following are contenyplated:

@ Yunnan-Haiphong Railway will be operated jointly by Chinese.

b. Haiphong will become free port. ;

é. French will exchange all live (s?e) hundred piastre notes held by
Chinese military. This will be very profituble to Chinese who have
been buying them up all over country at depreciated prices.

d. Chungking with assistauce of Chinese Consul Saigon is now
preparing list of existing French laws and practices which tend to
discriminate against Chinese businessmen in Indo-China. Principal
conrplaints are poll tax, other diseriminatery taxes. discrimination
in amounts of nioney wlowed to be exported. inypent dificulties and
allecedly unfaty distribution of rationed coods. French indicate
willingness to consider adjusting these points,

; [Laxnox |

58
