Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PHASE I IN THE BUILD-UP OF U. S. FORCES, THE DEBATE

MARCH - JULY 1965

I. The Situation, Spring and Early Summer, 1965

Vietnam in February, 1965, saw a brief flurry of enemy activity and 1
the departure of the volatile General Nguyen Khanh as a result of another
coup. The installation of Phan Huy Quat as Prime Minister and Phan Khac
Suu as Chief of State was followed by a period of ominous quiescence.

The drop in intensity of the fighting coincided with the dry season in the
southern parts of the country, with the beginning of the United States
Rolling Thunder program of continuous air strikes. against North Vietnam, ‘*
and with the arrival of the first U.S. ground combat troops committed to
Asian soil since Korea.

A. The Political Situation ‘

Despite its rather inauspicious beginning in February, the govern-
ment had by early April convinced the CIA that for the first time the pro-
gressive deterioration in the South Vietnamese political situation had come
to a halt. ay All the disruptive elements in the Vietnamese body politic
remained, but Quat displayed considerable talent in placating dissidents
and was setting about in his own quiet manner to tidy up the chaotic Saigon
government. Quat was no charismatic leader. If anything, he was the
opposite with his self-effacing, mild manner. But he impressed Ambassador
Taylor with his businesslike approach, and the latter had high hopes for
Quat's success.

By mid-May, to the dismay of the U.S. Mission, Quat's government
began to manifest considerable strain. The Buddhists, a not always con-
sistent pressure group, felt that Quat was too busy trying to please every-
one instead of initiating a strong action program. The Catholics, on the
other hand, were fearful of a Buddhist-dominated government and Saigon was
full of rumors of the formation of Catholic paramilitary units. 2/ Colonel
Pham Ngoc Thao, a familiar plotter, was said to have unsuccessfully attempted
a coup on behalf of the Catholics around the 20th of May. 3/

An apparently routine cabinet shuffle proposed by Premier Quat at
the end of May precipitated a crisis which led to the fall of his govern-
ment. Quat had intended to replace three cabinet ministers with souther-
ners; but the incumbents, with the support of Chief of State Suu, refused
to resign. All the dissident elements on the baigon political scene seized
on the incident as an excuse to rain invectives on Quat and, finding Suu all
too ready to listen to their complaints, used him to effectively paralyze
the government. L/ The crisis came to a head on 9 June when Quat asked
the senior generals of the RVNAF to mediate the dispute between himself and
Suu. Instead, the generals forced Quat to resign and took over the govern-
ment themselves.

41 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
