Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The GVN also tried to reorganize rural society from the
family level up on the communist cellular model. Each family was
grouped with two to six others into a Mutual Aid Family Group (lien gia),
and a like number of lien gia comprised a khom. 79/ There was an
appointed chief for both, serving as a chain of command for the community,
empowered to settle petty disputes, and obligated to pass orders and
information down from the authorities. Each lien gia was held respon-
sible for the political behavior of its members, and was expected to
report suspicious behavior (the presence of strangers, unusual departures,
and like events). Each house was required to display on a board outside a
listing of the number and sex of its inhabitants. These population
control measures were combined with improved systems of provincial police
identification cards and fingerprinting. The central government thus
became visible--and resented--at the village level as it had never been
before in Vietnam.

{+ Population Relocation

Security and control of the populace also figured in GVN
resettlement plans. Even the refugee relief programs had been executed
with an eye to national security. Diem visualized a “living wall" of
settlers between the lowland populace and the jungle and mountain redoubts
of dissidents. 80/ From flying trips, or from military maps, he personally
selected the sites for resettlement projects (Khu Dinh Dien) -~ often in
locales deprived of adequate water or fertile soil -- to which were moved
pioneering communities of Northern refugees, or settlers from the over-
crowded Annam coast. Between April 1957 and late 1961, one GVN report
showed 210,000 persons resettled in 147 centers carved from 220,000 acres
of wilderness. Some of the resentments over payments for resettled virgin
land were mentioned above. More importantly, however, these "strategic"
programs drew a disproportionate share of foreign aid for agriculture; by
U.S. estimates, the 2% of total population affected by resettlement received
50% of total aid.

The resettlements precipitated unexpected political reactions
from the Montagnard peoples of the Central Vietnam Highlands. The tribes
were traditionally hostile to the Vietnamese, and proved to be easily
mobilized against the GVN- In 1959 the GVN began to regroup and consoli-
date the tribes into defensible communities to decrease their vulnerability
to anti-government agents, and to ease the applying of cultural uplift
programs. By late 1961 these relocations were being executed on a large
scale. In Kontum Province, for instance, 35,000 tribesmen were regrouped
in autumn 1961, about 50 percent of its total Montagnard population. 81/
Some of the hill people refused to remain in their new communities, but the
majority stayed. In the long run, the relocations probably had the effect
of focusing Montagnard discontent against the GVN, and facilitating, rather
than hindering, the subversion of the tribes. When, in 1964, tribes
around Ban Me Thuot rebelled openly against the GVN, they rallied around
FULRO, a Montagnard autonomy movement with Viet Cong ties. In the recita-
tion of wrongs and demands that FULRO presented to the GVN, it asserted

29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
