Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

President and the Secretary of State were reached, however, and approved
the draft. Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric approved for
Defense, and General Taylor for the JCS. Schlesinger, in his account

of the incident, suggests that the cable was hasty and ill-considered,
and that the President immediately began to back awey from it. 23/

Lodge replied the following day endorsing the strong position but
proposing to forego a futile approach to Diem and to state our position
instead only to the generals, thus throwing all our weight behind a
coup. The cable stated:

Believe that chances of Diem's meeting our demands are
virtually nil, At the same time, by making them we give
Whu chance to forestall or block action by military. Risk,
we believe, is not worth taking, with Nhu in control combat
forces Saigon. Therefore, propose we go straight to Generals
with our demands, without informing Diem. Would tell them
we prepared have Diem without Nhus but it is in effect up
to them whether to keep him, 2)/

Hilsman asserts that the cable also reflected Lodge's view that since
our disapproval of GVN action was well known, it was not fitting for the
U.S. to go to Diem, it was Diem who should come to us. 25/

In a separate CAS cable the same day, Richardson, the CIA Chief of
Station in Saigon, reported that at a meeting with Lodge and Harkins it
. had been agreed that Diem would not remove Nhu and that therefore,
assuming State's cable of instructions on 24 August (Appendix) represented
Washington's basic policy, the consensus was that contact should be
immediately made with generals such as Minh and Khanh to assess the
degree of unity and determination of senior officers. Minh was considered
the best possible interim leader, with Vice President Tho as the most
attractive candidate for President among the civilians. The cable con-
cluded with the view that a junta would probably operate behind the
scenes in the event of a successful coup, and that the U.S. should
leave the specific tactics of a coup up to the generals, 26/ There is
a hiatus in the available cable traffic at this point, but Hilsman
indicates that Washington decided on Sunday, August 25, to defer a
direct approach to Diem until more was known about the situation. 27/

In Lodge's reply, he had also apparently approved the proposed VOA
broadcast to exonerate the army. Hilsman briefed the press on the basis
of a previously approved draft statement on August 25. The statement
expressed strong U.S. disapproval of the raids, which were attributed to
Nhu. In reporting the story, the press speculated that such a strong
statement probably indicated that measures such as aid suspension were
being considered, VOA had been instructed to broadcast only the sub-
stances of the U.S. statement as provided in the press guidance and
nothing more. The instructions somehow got mislaid, and on Monday
morning, August 26, just several hours before Lodge was to present his
eredentials to Diem, VOA broadcast in full a UPI story which flatly

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
