Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This Accord taxed Ho's popularity to the utmost, and it took all
Ho's prestige to prevent open rebellion. On 27 May 1946, Ho countered
these attacks by merging the Viet Minh into the Lien Viet, a larger, :
more embracing "national front." Amity within the Lien Viet, however,
lasted only as long as the Chinese remained in North Vietnam. When
they withdrew a few weeks later, in mid-June, the Viet Minh, supported
by French troops, attacked the Dong Minh Hoi and the VNQDD, as "enemies
of the peace," effectively suppressed organized opposition, and asserted
Viet Minh control throughout North Vietnam.

But even this ascendancy proved transitory. Ho Chi Minh, though
he tried hard, was unable to negotiate any durable modus vivendi with
the French in the-summer and fall of 1946. In the meantime, the DRV
and the Viet Minh were drawn more and more under the control of the
"Marxists" of the former ICP. For example, during the session of the
DRV National Assembly in November, nominal opposition members were
whittled down to 20 out of more than 300 seats, and a few "Marxists"
dominated the proceedings. Nonetheless, the DRV government maintained
at least a facade of coalition. A chart (pp. B51-55) of its leadership
during 1945-1949 illustrates that through 1949, ICP members remained in
the minority, and nominally oppositionist VNQDD and Dong Minh Hoi politi-
cians were consistently included.

Although the Cochinchina war continued throughout 1946, with the
Viet Minh assuming a leading role in resistance, war in North Vietnam
did not break out until December, 1946. A series of armed clashes in
November were followed by a large scale fighting in Hanoi in late December.
The DRV government took to the hills to assume the status of shadow state.
The Viet Minh transformed itself back into a semi-covert resistance organ-
ization and committed itself throughout the nation to the military defeat
of the French. During the opening year of the war, 1947, the Viet Minh
took steps to restore its image as a popular, patriotic, anti-foreign
movement, and again to play down the ICP role in its leadership. The
DRV government was reorganized and prominent communists excluded. As
the Viet Minh gathered strength over the years, however, these same
leaders reentered the DRV government.

In February 1951, addressing the Congress of the Vietnamese Communist
Party (Lao Dong), Ho Chi Minh stated that the Communist Party had formed
and led the Viet Minh, and founded and ruled the DRV. When the French
colonialists reappeared in South Vietnam and a Nationalist Chinese-
sponsored government seemed in prospect in North Vietnam, Ho averred,
the Party went underground, and entered into agreements with the French:

"Tenin said that even if a compromise with bandits was
advantageous to the revolution, he would do it...."

B-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
