Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(2-1/3 divisions and 6 tactical air squadrons) to be deployed in FY 67.
Course A, as Katzenbach described it, also included “more later to ful-
fill the JCS alternate requirements." Course B confined troop increases
to “those that could be generated without calling up the reserves" --
perhaps 9 battalions or about 10,000 men in the next year. 45/

The first option, Course A, was to be analyzed across a matrix of
many factors such as cost, actions required, trends, call up of reserves,
extension of tours, enlargement of uniformed strength, effect on U.S.
force deployment, involvement in pacification, possible stimulation by
this course of great intensification of military actions outside South
Vietnam including invasion of North Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. The
domestic reaction including possible polarization of opinion and stimu-
jJation of pressures for actions outside Vietnam, the manner in which to
approach the public and the Congress on this course, and finally the inter-
national reactions on the part of the North Vietnamese, Soviets, Chinese
and other nations were also to be examined. The Undersecretary also asked
for an analysis of the effect of Course A on the possibilities for 4
settlement.

In addition to addressing the same considerations as under Course A
in Part B, the respondents were asked to analyze how our military strategy
under this meager troop level increase would differ from that of the larger
level, how the level of actions against North Vietnam and Cambodia would
look, the effect of such a small added increment on our flexibility, and
the effect on the VC/NVA. Finally, McNaughton representing DOD was requested
to analyze possible bombing strategies in the North as they related to both
courses of action.

Katzenbach suggested consideration of measures which could be taken
in the south to strengthen the GVN and develop the RVNAF as a substitute
for more U.S, troops, thereby placing primary emphasis on the war in the
South and perhaps allow us to cut back on the bombing in the North.
Katzenbach also felt that some consideration should be given to a study -
of the present use of U.S. forces and whether they are being used in the
most efficient ways possible, in effect a reappraisal of ground force
strategy. He asked that such measures as the following be discussed:

(a) Expansion of RF/PF by 100,000 in FY 1968;

(bo) Efforts to improve RVNAF leadership, including
insistence on dismissal of incompetent commanders, with-
holding of MAP from ineffective units, and some sort of US

rewards for competent commanders;

(ec) A Joint Command;

78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
