Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

JOHNSON ADMINISTRATION = 1967

SUMMARY

In general, the justification of U.S. involvement in Vietnam in
1967 centered on the determination of America to honor the commitment
under SEATO, The continuation of the build-up of U.S. military strength
was justified as necessary to fight the "limited war in Vietnam in an
attempt to prevent a larger war...." -- to stop what Secretary Rusk
called the "phenomenon of aggression.” The national interests of the
U.S. were enunciated to establish the "credibility" of U.S. diplomacy.
Justification for U.S. policy considered the following:

a. The United States was in Vietnam because of the SEATO
commitment to the collective self-defense against armed ageression.
This commitment was necessary to eliminate aggression and build a
durable peace. The ultimate aims are to protect the security of the
U.S. and to resist aggression.

b. The “domino theory" was not needed to explain the future
of Southeast Asia -- the world revolution of militant communism pro-
claimed by Peking was the theory, that is, the "phenomenon of aggression."

ec. The U.S. commitment has bolstered our allies, promoted a
confidence factor in Vietnam, and provided the crucial test for "wars
of national liberation” as a tool of communist revolution.

d. U.S. policy has been guided by two basic propositions:
that extension of hostile control ty Asian communism was a threat to
U.S. interests, and that a free and independent East Asian and Pacific
region is essential to world peace.

e. The U.S. involvement*has followed a legal course from the
Eisenhower commitments and "domino theory" of the 1950's through the
escalation of the 1960's. Senate approvals of SEATO, various authoriza-
tions and appropriations, and the joint resolution of August, 1964, have
supported Presidential action. '

f. "Aggressive conduct if allowed to go unchecked and unchal-
lenged, ultimately leads to war." The appetite of aggression feeds on
aggression -- the U.S. seeks to prevent a wider war by challenging
communist expansion now in Southeast Asia -- as opposed to appeasement
diplomacy of the 1930's.

D-9)
