Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

a. The Military Threatens Diem

General Nguyen Van Hinh, Chief of Staff of the Viet-
namese National Army, was the first coup-plotter to rise and first to
fall. September threats of a military revolt were first staved off by
the mediation of U.S. Ambassador Donald Heath and General Ely (who
doubted Diem's capacity to lead but worked to prevent his violent down-
fall). Then Diem uncovered a coup plot, arrested some Hinh supporters,
removed the general from command and ordered him out of the country. 37
Hinh refused to leave and continued his machinations against the govern-
ment. Plans for one coup in October were dropped when Hinh was told
revolt would mean automatic termination of U.S. aid. 38/ Another’
scheduled for October 26 was foiled when Colonel E. G. Lansdale, head
of the Saigon Military Mission and chief CIA man on the scene, lured
two key subordinates out of the country. Lansdale invited Hinh and
staff to visit the Philippines. Hinh unhappily declined but his
supporters -- one of whom allegedly was a French agent -- could not
resist the chance to see the inner workings of the Magsaysay-led, U.S.-
supported operation against Huk insurgents. 39/ Finally, in November,
Bao Dai was persuaded by America and France to intervene on Diem's
behalf. He did, ordered Hinh to report to Cannes, and on November 19,
the general left the country. 40/ General Hinh enjoyed some French
support in his anti-Diem activity. Ambassador Heath reported he received
"quiet encouragement if not unofficial support" from many French officers
and officials in Saigon and "at the working level in Paris." 41/ Hinh
was also aided initially by the sects, later by the Binh Xuyen.

b. The Sects Threaten Diem

The Cao Dai and Hoa Hao sects, basically religious
groups with important political controls and interests as well as private,
French-subsidized armies, worked with Hinh through early September.
Then, spurred by the knowledge that precipitate action would jeopardize
American aid, the sects agreed to work with Diem. ha/ Iast minute
threats and "heavy pressure” from French officials against coalition
left sect leaders "dizzy" but they recovered sufficiently to accept
cabinet positions on September 24. 43/ Shaky to begin with, the co-
alition never worked: Diem refused to delegate responsibility to his
eight new ministers and they soon tired of trying to work through the
government.

c, And the Binh Xuyen Oppose Diem

The Binh Xuyen, too, considered joining the coalition
but pulled out when Diem refused to name Binh Xuyen leader, "a colorful
brigand named Le Van (Bay) Vien" Minister of the Interior. 44/ Bay Vien
had forged a motley group of small-time gangsters into a fairly sophis-
ticated organization of 6000 big-time gangsters and river pirates, and

13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
