Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"The Central Committee of the Vietnam Lao Dong
Party has held its 15th enlarged session to review the
developments in the struggle for national reunification
and lay down the tasks for the whole party and people
in connection with that struggle...

"North Vietnam, now completely liberated, has
carried through its task of national people's democratic
revolution and is carrying out the socialist revolution
and building socialism. This is an extremely important
change which determines the direction of development of
the Vietnamese revolution in the new stage. Meanwhile,
the southern part of our country is still under the domination
of the American imperialists and their lackey -- Ngo Dinh
Diem. They have turned South Vietnam into a new-type
colony and a military base for preparing war. + - .

"The interventionist policy of the U.S. imperialists
and the South Vietnam authorities' policy of dependence
on the United States have undermined and deliberately
continue to undermine the implementation of the Geneva
agreements and the cause of peaceful national reunifica-
tion, thus cutting across the desire and interests of
the Vietnamese people. The U.S. imperialists and their
followers are scheming to perpetuate the division of our
country and prepare a new war.

"To carry out this perfidious scheme, over the past few
years the U.S.-Diem clique has been actively increasing its
military forces, carrying out a policy of ruthless exploita-
tion of the people, abolishing all democratic functions,
repressing and terrorizing the people in a most barbarous
manner, causing ever more serious dislocation of the South
Vietnamese economy, and making the life of local people
more and more precarious and wretched . .

"To achieve national reunification on the basis of
independence and democracy, the session mapped out the
following tasks: the entire people will uniteand strive
to struggle for national reunification on the basis of
independence and democracy to endeavor to consolidate the
North and actively take it step by step toward socialism,
to build a peaceful, unified, independent, democratic,
prosperous and strong Vietnam; and to contribute to the
safeguarding of peace in Southeast Asia and the world.

"The session expressed its unshakable belief that our
whole people, uniting and struggling heroically and

58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
