Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the I and II Corps. The slowdown in the pace of pacification is due to
several factors which include: the preoccupation of some senior com-
manders with Saigon politics, the Tet holiday period, and VC strength,
which in some areas has forced the GVN military forces into static or
defensive roles.”

MACV Monthly Evaluation Report for Fébruary 1965:

"The only pacification progress during February was registered in
Hop Tac and other areas of III Corps, while other sections of the country
either held earlier gains or showed deterioration. Contributing factors
were increased VC activity, especially in the I and II Corps and the
administrative confusion associated with the attempted coup of 19 February.
At month's end, the 1965 pacification plans were still undergoing a review,
with the result that pacification funds had not yet been released to the
provinces. A stopgap allocation of 3 million $VN per province was made by
the New Rural Life Directorate to permit programs to continue pending
release of regular funds. Even so, many province chiefs are reluctant to
push forward without more specific authorization and direction from higher
authorities."

MACV Monthly Evaluation Report for March 1965:

"Although there was a lull in VC activity during the last half of the
month, field commanders failed to capitalize on the situation and pursue
pacification goals vigorously. During the month the pacification generally
experienced regression in I and II CTZ while parts of III and IV Corps
recorded slow but steady progress.” In the Hop Tac area consistent gains
were recorded throughout the month." ;

CIA Weekly Report, 24 March 1965:

"Pacification efforts during the past week remained stalled through-
out most of the country. ‘Some progress was seen in II Corps in pacifica-
tion efforts.”

MACV Monthly Evaluation for April 1965: .

"Despite improved psychological conditions and the continued lull in
vc activity, there was little tangible evidence of progress in rural re-
eonstruction during the month...Overall, the slow but steady progress in
III and IV Corps was offset by losses in I and II Corps. Contributing
factors to this standstill were the GVN delay in approving provincial
budgets and a continued lack of aggressiveness in operations directly
supporting rural reconstruction. There was no appreciable increase in
the number of refugees this month and-relief measures taken by the
Minister of Social Welfare and the province chiefs appear to be progress-
ing satisfactorily, particularly in Binh Dinh and Quang Ngai provinces.”

53) ie TOP SECRET - Sensitive
