Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

would be too weak and would tend toward neutralism, Khanh replied that

the Army would be vigilant. Taylor again advised Khanh to lay the ground-
work better before any more changes in government structure. When the ‘

Triumvirete announced the creation of the NHC, they also ended the state

of emergency and press censorship, which they had declared on September 6. 29/

On the morning of September 6, as he was leaving for Washington,
Taylor sent Rusk a full review of the crisis and of its effects on the
Embassy-State military and political appraisal of mid-August. He said that
the USG now had to give up on the idea of using a plan for pressures on
the North as leverage to get the GVN to press on with pacification, and
should go ahead with these pressures in the hope that they would raise
Vietnemese morale enough to keep up their war effort:

",. While we mst be disappointed by the political tur-
moil of recent days, we carmot consider it totally unexpected.
The very nature of the social, political and ethnic confusion
in this country makes governmental turbulence of this type
a factor which we will always have with us. ;

“What has emerged from these recent events is a defini-
tion within fairly broad limits of the degree to which per-
fectability in govermment can be pushed. It should be remembered
that the recent fracas started when Khanh sought to make his
broad and cumbersome government more tractable and more effec-
tive. His motives were of the best even though his methods
were clumsy. But now, after this recent experience at govern-
ment improvement we must accept the fact that an effective
govermnent, much beyond the capacity of that which has existed
over the past several months, is unlikely to survive. We
now have a& better feel for the quality of our ally and for
what we can expect from him in terms of ability to govern.
Only the emergence of an exceptional leader could improve the
situation and no George Washington is in sight.

"Consequently, we can and must anticipate for the future

an instrument of government which will have definite limits of
performance. At the very worst, it will continue to seek a
broadened consensus involving and attempting to encompass all.

or most of the minority of popular front. This amalgam, if

it takes form, may be expected in due course to become sus-
ceptible to an accommodation with the liberation front, which

might eventually lead te a collapse of all political energy

behind the pacification effort. :

“At best, the emerging governmental structure might be
capable of maintaining a holding operation against the Viet
Cons. This level of effort could, with good luck and strenu-
ous American efforts, be expanded to produce certain Limited
pacification successes, for example, in the territory covered
by the Hop Tac plan. But the willingness and ability of such
a government to exert itself or to attempt to execute an all-out

he TOP SECRET - Sensitive
