Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECREI - Sensitive

political strength essential for the mobilization of the
country's resources . . . elected local councils have no real
power, promised land reform and other social and economic reforms
which might generate popular support had not left the planning
stage and the Vietnamese government is handicapped by incompetent
cabinent ministers and the lack of competent administrators."
(NIE 9 of 4 June 1953, p. 3)

"Finally, unless the French Union forces prove strong enough
to provide security for the Vietnamese population, it will not
be possible to sweep the guerrillas out of the areas as planned.
Not only will the populace fail generally to provide the intelligence
required to rout the guerrillas but, as in the past, they will
frequently give warning of the presence of the French Union forces,
thus permitting the guerrillas to take cover and later to emerge
when the danger is past." (Ibid., p. 5)

Seven years later, the estimate of August 1960 was
pointing out:

" . . » Viet Cong guerrilla units have succeeded in exploiting
their natural advantages of surprise, mobility, and initiative.

In many of their areas of operations, they have exploited the
tendency of the largely passive population to accommodate to their
presence and thereby avoid reprisals. In some areas of operations,
however, they have obtained the active cooperation of the local
population." (SNIE 63.1-60, p. 3)

"In the absence of more effective government measures to
protect the peasants and to win their positive cooperation, the
prospect is for expansion of the areas of Viet Cong control in the
countryside, particularly in the southwestern provinces.

"Dissatisfaction and discontent with the government will
probably continue to rise unless the security situation improves
and unless Diem can be brought to reduce the corruption and
excesses Of his regime ... "

The conclusions of the estimate were the most ominous since

1956:

"Developments within South Vietnam over the past six months
indicate a trend adverse to the stability and effectiveness of
President Diem's government .. ."

"Although Diem's personal position and that of his government

are probably not now in danger, the marked deterioration since
January of this year is disturbing. These adverse trends are not

oi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
