Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The new U.S. team set out immediately to systematize U.S. opera-
tions in Vietnam, including reorganization of the upper echelons of
the Mission. Added to this was an effort to improve the efficiency
of the GVN and USG-GVN cooperation by developing a coordinate, paral-
lel GVN organization, On 7 July Ambassador Taylor reported that,
following recommendations from Deputy Ambassador Johnson and agency
heads there, he had organized U.S. mission operations under the
direction of a U.S, Mission Council, over which he would preside,

The Council was to consist of himself, Johnson, Westmoreland, Killen
(temporarily Hurt), Zorthian, DeSilva and Sullivan. This group was

to meet once a week as an executive organization. To support this
council he also established a Coordinating Committee to be chaired by
Sullivan. This would carry out Mission Council decisions and prepare
the agenda for Council meetings. On the following dey, 8 July,
Ambassador Taylor reported that he had called upon Khanh, and that
Khanh had expressed satisfaction over the new U.S. personnel, and noted
the rising morale their appointments had caused within the government.
Taylor told Khanh about the formation of the Mission Council and Khanh
asked for an organization chart so that he could develop a coordinate
set-up within the GVN. Khanh said moreover that the U.S. should not
merely advise, but should actually participate in GVN operations and
decisions, "We should do this in Saigon (as well as in the provinces),
between GVN ministries and offices and their American counterparts.” 105/

The new Ambassador did not delay in plunging into the substance of
the problems that were plaguing Vietnam. In his first conversations
with Khanh he asked about the status of the religious problem, and
according to Taylor's report of the conversation, Khanh said the situa-
tion was still delicate, that the Catholics were better organized and
were the aggressors, that Thich Tri Quang appeared reasonable when in
Saigon but less so when in Hue, When the Ambassador queried Khanh
about the progress of the recruiting effort, Khanh said that it was not
going as well as he would like. With respect to the new pacification
plan, HOP TAC, that had been agreed upon, the Ambassador expressed his
approval of the general idea because paramilitary forces existed in
this area to relieve ARVN. The Ambassador next took wo the question of
high desertion rates to which Khanh appears to have replied rather
fuzzily. He said that the problem was complicated by many factors, that
the Vietnamese liked to serve near home and sometimes left one service
.to join another, He implied that the figures might not mean exactly
what they seemed to mean.

The lively interest of the President at this time was indicated by
his 10 July request directly to the Ambassador for a coordinated Country
Team report at the end of each month to show "where we stand in the
process of increasing the effectiveness of our military, economic, in-
formation, and intelligence programs, just where the Khanh government
stands in the same fields, and what progress we are making in the effort
to mesh our work with theirs along the lines of your talk with General
Khanh, 106/

- 86 , TOP SECRET - Sensitive
