Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

the north had been underestimated, and substantially increased our assistance
to the Government and people of South Vietnam."

eS) foe See

"Hanoi and Peiping have not yet learned that they mst leave their
neighbors alone. But this is a decision which they must reach. We and
our SFEATO allies have declared that the communist aggressions in Southeast
Asia must be defeated. As you said, Commander Gulewicz, in your statement
to the platform committees of the two major parties, '...we cannot afford =!
to abandon the free people of Vietnam. The world watches because South
Vietnam is a critical test-case for new communist strategy.'"

ue ea

"

14. "Progress and Problems in Bast Asia: An American Viewpoint," by
William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Hastern Affairs, Address
made before the Research Institute of Japan at Tokyo, 29 September 1964,
Department of State Bulletin, 19 October 1964, p. 537:

x *

"\ word further atout the situation in Southeast Asia, especially in
South Vietnam. Here the aim of our policy is to assist the Government of
South Vietnam in maintaining its independence and its control over the terri-
tory allotted to it by the Geneva accords of 1954. We do not aim at overthrow-
ing the commmist regime of North Vietnam but rather at inducing it to call
off the war it directs and supports in South Vietnam.

"We believe it essential to the interests of the free world that South
Vietnam not be permitted to fall under communist control. If it does, then
the rest of Southeast Asia will be in grave danger of progressively disappear-
ing behind the Bamboo Curtain and other Asian countries like India and even
in time Australia and your own nation in turn will be threatened. If Hanoi
and Peiping prevail in Vietnam in this key test of the new communist tactics
of 'wars of national liberation,’ then the communists will use this technique
with growing frequency elsewhere in Asia, Africa, and Latin America."

* * ¥
15. Secretary Rusk's News Conference of December 23, Press Release dated
23 December 1964, Department of State Bulletin, 11 January 1965, vp. 37:

"American Interest in Vietnamese Independence:

"Q. Mr. Secretary, it is sometimes stated that one of the reasons for
American assistance to Vietnam is the fact that vital Western interests

p38
