Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

d. In the wind-up phase of the 12-week program (during
the eleventh and twelfth week), strikes against on-hand supplies,
equipment, and military facilities will be continued, attacking
remaining worth-while targets throughout the DRV. As @ part of
this phase, industriel targets outside of population areas will
be struck, leading up to a situation where the enemy must realize
that the Hanoi and Haiphong areas will be the next logical tar-
gets in our continued air campaign.

2. /The program includes/ an anti-MIG strike package; how-
ever, as provided in the policy guidance furnished the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, this mission will not be executed unless the
DRV MIG aircraft are able to impair the effectiveness of the
strike forces. Combat air patrol aircraft, in sufficient num-
bers to deter MIG attack, will accompeny all missions and will
engage these DRV aircraft as required to protect the force.
Strike forces and armed reconnaissance aircraft may persist in
their missions but other reconnaissance missions will break off
mission to avoid contact with MIG aircraft if feasible. Heavily
populated areas will be avoided by both strike and armed recon-
naissance missions.

3. Strike sorties for the next ten weeks would total ep-
proximately 3,000 or roughly 300 per week. CINCPAC has reported
a capability to conduct approximately 1,600 strike sorties per
week on a sustained basis. This leaves ample margin for US air
support within South Vietnam and Laos and substantial armed
reconnaissance to sustain the LOC interdiction...

Interestingly, the Joint Chiefs did not endorse the entire air strike
progrem they submitted to the Secretary of Defense. They recommended that
only the first phase (third, fourth, and fifth weeks of the progrem) be
approved for execution. They had evidently failed to reach agreement on
the later phases (weeks six through twelve), and indicated to the Secre-
tery of Defense that they were still in the process of "considering
alternatives for a follow-on program of air strikes beginning with the
sixth week. They will advise you further in this regard, taking account
of the developing situation, the current policy considerations, and mili-
tary measures available to us."

As matters developed, however, even the three-week program endorsed _
by the JCS was not approved by the Secretary of Defense, ‘though it
strongly influenced the new interdiction-oriented focus of the attacks
that were to follow, as well as the particular targets that were selected.
But neither the Secretary of Defense nor the President was willing to
approve 2 multi-week orogram in advance. They clearly preferred to
retain continual personal control over attack concepts and individual
target selection. Consequently, although the Joint Chiefs strongly urged

79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
