Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

incidents we have seen this week, in which Communist egents
stirred up a village protest against government air attacks,
and against the US. Basically, they would see the situation ~
in South Viet-Nem as likely to deteriorate further (crumble,

as they have put it), and would be expecting that at some point
someone in the GVN will start secret talks with them behind
our backs. -

b. Conmunist China might supply additional air defense
equipment to the DRV, but we do not believe they would engage
in air operations from Communist China, at least up to the
point where the MIGs in the DRV were engaged and we had found
it necessary to attack Fukien or possibly -- if the MIGs had
been moved there -- Vinh.

ec. The Soviets would supply air defense equipment to
the DRV and would continue to protest our air attacks in strong
terms. However, we do not believe they would make any new
commitment at this stage, and they would probably not do so even
if the Chicoms became even more deeply involved -- provided that
we were not ourselves attacking Commmmist China. At that point,
the heat might get awfully great on them, and they would be in a
very difficult position to continue actively working as Co-
Chairman. However, their approach to the British on the Co-
Chairmanship certainly suggests that they would find some relief
in starting to act in that role, and might use it as a hedge
against further involvement, perhavs pointing out to Hanoi that
the Co-Chairman exercise serves to prevent us from taking extreme
action and that Hanoi will get the same result in the end if a
political track is operating and if, in fact, South Viet-Nam
keeps crumbling. They might also argue to Hanoi that the exis-
tence of the political track tends to reduce the chances of the
Chicoms having to become deeply involved -- which we believe
Hanoi does not want unless it is compelled to accept it.

2. Within South Viet-Nam the new government is a somewhat
better one, /Note;: this was written one day before the semi-
coup/ but the cohesive effects of the strikes to date have at
most helped things a bit. The latest MACY report indicates a
deteriorating situation except in the extreme south, and it is
unlikely that this can be arrested in any short period of time
even if the govermment does hold together well and the military
go about their business. We shall be very lucky to see a level-
ing off, mvch less any significant improvement, in the next two
months. In short, we may have to hang on quite a long time
before we can hope to see an improving situation in South Viet-
Nam -- and this. in turn is really the key to any a aaa
position we could have at any time.

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
