Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for expectetion that Viet Cong, who were clearly making prog-
ress as recently as February, can regain the initiative and,

by the application of offensive power, can create an atmosphere
in which negotiations favorable to the DRV can be instituted.

Given this situation, the report argued, the most probable course.
of action that Hanoi would pursue is to continue its efforts to expand
its military action in the South, "including covert introduction of
additional PAVN units on order of several regiments. This course orfers
«+.the prospect of achieving major military gains capable of offsetting
us/GVN application of air power. Such gains would expand Viet Cong areas
of control and might lead to political demoralization in South Vietnen."

119/

A similarly unencouraging assessment had been submitted to the
President by the Board of National Estimates on April 22. In a "highly
sensitive, limited distribution" memorandum, the leading personalities
of the U.S, intelligence community concurred in the prediction that:

If present US policies continue without the introduction
of large additional forces or increased US air effort, the
Communists are likely to hold to their existing policy of
seeking victory in the local military struggle in Souta Viet-
nam. They will try to intensify that struggle, supporting it
with additional men and equipment. At the same time, DRV air
defenses will be strengthened through Soviet and perhaps
Chinese aid. :

If, however, the U.S. deepens its involvement by increasing its
combat role and intensifying its air effort, the intelligence officers
believed:

«+ethat the Viet Cong, North Vietnam, and China would -
initially...try to offset the new enemy strength by stepping
up the insurgency, reinforcing the Viet Cong with the men and
equipment necessary. They would likely count on time being
on their side and try to force the piecemeal engagement of
US troops under conditions which might bog them down in jungle
warfare, hoping to present the US with a de facto partition of
the country. The Soviet Union... would almost certainly
acquiesce in a decision by Hanoi to intensify the struggle. 120/

This lack of any real prospect of "give™ on the enemy's part was
also confirmed by Admiral Reborn, shortly after he had succeeded John
MeCone as Director of Central Intelligence. On the dey of Raborn's
swearing-in (April 28), the President had given nim a letter from McCone
(apparently worded along the lines of his memorandum described in
Section IX.E. of this study) which MeCone had handed to the President
as his last official act. The President had asked Reborn to prepare

108 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
