Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

have progressed to the point where 1,000 U.S. military personnel
assigned to South Viet-Nam can be withdrawn.

4, The political situation in South Viet-Nam remains deeply
serious. The United States had made clear its continuing opposition
to any repressive actions in South Viet-Nam. While such actions have
not yet significantly affected the military effort, they could do so
in the future.

>- Jt remains the policy of the United States, in South Viet-
Nam as in other parts of the world, to support the efforts of the
people of that country to defeat aggression and to build a peaceful
and free society.

Considerable emphasis was given to the White House statement, and to the
McNamara-Taylor Mission generally, in news media. Played up particularly
was the U.S. force withdrawal, especially the prospective 1000-man reduction.

Three days later, on 5 October, in another meeting with the President,
followed by another NSC meeting, the McNamara-Taylor recommendations them-
selves were addressed. The President "approved the military recommendations
contained in the report." The President also directed, in line with their
suggestion, that no formal announcement be made of the implementation of
plans to withdraw 1000 U.S. military personnel from South Vietnam by the
end of 1963. 42/

The effect of the McNamara-Taylor mission, thus, was to revalidate
the existing U.S. policy position regarding Vietnam. Reaffirmed were the
military objectives, courses of action, and programs essentially as they
were laid out by the Secretary of Defense at the Honolulu Conference over
a year earlier on 23 July 1962. The underlying premises and soundness
of the rationale seemed more cogent than ever. In fact, a new impetus
was thereby given to pursuing the same goals with even greater thrust and
purpose. Such an outcome could have been forecast, as noted earlier,
when Mr. McNamara set in motion another CPSVN planning cycle to revise
the Model M Plan and develop an accelerated plan to withdraw U.S. forces.

Part of the motivation behind the stress placed on U.S. force with-
drawal, and particularly the seemingly arbitrary desire to effect the 1000-
man reduction by the end of 1963, apparently was as a signal to influence
both the North Vietnamese and the South Vietnamese and set the stage for
possible later steps that would help bring the insurgency to an end. With
regard to the SVN, the demonstration of determination to pull out U.S.
forces was intended to induce the South Vietnamese to increase the effective-
ness of their military effort. 43/ State's instructions to Ambassador
Lodge resulting from NSC action on the McNamara-Taylor mission indicated
that:

"Actions are designed to indicate to Diem Government our dis-
pleasure at its political policies and activities and to create
significant uncertainty in that government and in key Vietnamese
groups as to future intentions of United States. At same time,
actions are designed to have at most slight impact on military or

.

23. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
