Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

in all probability dug in at least until after the Viet-
namese elections. After that, we could take another look,
but I still doubt that any serious change will be indicated.
If it is, some approach like the Ne Win one seems to me by
far the most promising.

"A key question is of course how we handle the Soviets.
My own hunch is that Kosygin burned his fingers somewhat
in February, but that they have built their position in
Hanoi at least back to its former level. In the process,
they will have almost certainly undertaken some additional
aid. Knowing as they do all our peace moves, they may have
@ strong feeling that we are in a hurry and perhaps suscept-
ible to change. This would argue against pressing them hard
in the near future, as we did in early April in any event.

"On the other hand, we certainly could impress upon them
our belief that their own interest lies in getting the situ-
ation resolved, and that they should be exerting real influence
to this end. But this should be coupled with a calm firmness
in our own determination to go ahead and not to be thrown off
by anything additional they may be doing or threaten to do.

In the last analysis, they can judge whether they aeeny have
any leverage and how to exert it.

"At any rate, the next major contacts with the Soviets --
Dobrynin's return and Brown's visit to Moscow in late May --
should in my judgment be played in this measured but essentially
low key unless they come up with something. Brown is not
himself inclined to try something new at the moment, and we
should do nothing to encourage him. (He has a full plate
anyway of other issues.) 63/

Bundy's basically optimistic estimate (50-50 was in the context
of the time optimistic) was partially supported by the reports of ground
action coming out of South Vietnam, although the increasing enemy threat
in I CTZ remained an ominous and somewhat puzzling development.

‘5. Developments in the Ground War: Strategy Takes Shape

Ground operations in the period February into early May followed
essentially the pattern predicted by COMUSMACV in his earlier assessments
and statements of strategy. The PRAIRIE series of operations conducted
by the Marines to counter infiltration through the DM% had received per-
mission during the month to employ artillery fire against military targets

89 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
