Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1. Announce that the U.S. was not consulted, gave no help.
Ky's use of 139 routine, "not material assistance."

2. Furnish no airlift.

3. Withdraw all advisers from I CiZ, including from loyal Gyr
units, except for any clearly in position to fight VC. Keep
U.S. forces out, except maybe to fight VC.

4. Inasmuch as withdrewal of civilians and military from Daliang
in early April had a sobering effect, State authorized with-
drawing them again (including combat forces).

5. Exeption to 3: Keep contacts with Thi and lst Division,
and make other like exceptions. (Purpose of withdrawal is
to avoid appearance of involvement.)

6. Use contacts to get a compromise that avoids bloodshed.
7. Find out “soonest” the effect on election preparations.
8. Do not throw U.S. weight behind GVIi effort. 18/

However, the "rough talk" actually used did reach the point of a clear
threat of force. General Walt heard of a possible VNAF attack on dissident
ARV; units in their compounds, and threatened to use U.S. jets to shoot
down the VNAF aircraft if they did. (The pretext was that U.S, advisers
would be threatened if they did, and did not apply to VAP self-defense
against dissident ARVN units closing on Daliang.) If such an attack was
planned, the threat succeeded. 19/

Porter followed State's guidance closely; he put it strongly to Ky
and Thieu that the failure to consult was unacceptable, withheld airlift
from GV and withdrew advisers from units on both sides, and obtained from
Thieu the assurance that the election would be held as promised. He
refused to give public backing or opposition to either side, and tried to
mediate. State sent several more messages with guidance along the same
lines, and directed him to tell both sides of USG's impatience with Viet-
namese factionalism:

The American people are becoming fed up with the games
they are playing while the Americans are being asked to
sustain such major burdens. 20/

On May 17, a U.S. helicopter received small arms fire from a dissi-
dent ARVN unit when carrying a GVN officer to parley with them; the
helicopter returned the fire, causing several casualties. In a stormy
meeting the next dey with Corcoran, the U.S. Consul in Hue, Tri Quang

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
