Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SECRET
#
MEETING OF THE U.S. - FRENCH FOREIGN MINISTERS:
FIRST MEETING, WASHINGTON, SEPTEMBER 11, 1951,
PD ST SE Gi 5 ole na oma ae et ot)

Extract from Minutes!
Indochina

1. M. SCHUMAN said that his Government was preparing
a note on Indochina dealing with the present troop
strength and casualties and containing a projection of
plans and, problems for 1952. Without going into details
it was cledr that it would be impossible for France
to carry out the proposed effort in Indochina and to
fulfill its obligations with respect to the defense of
Europe. France planned to spend a billion francs a
day in Indochina alone and faced many problems in
obtaining a maximum effort there:iascit was_engaged to
‘do. As to the financial problem the Finance Ministers
would be discussingzitifurther. .In. brief, vafier July:.t,
1952,.the French would be unable to continue their effort
at the present rate and would face a 150 billion
frane deficit for the year. This deficit incidentally
was included in the French estimate on the dollar gap.
It was not suggested that the U.S. finance French policy
directly but it was hoped that the U.S. could assist
by arms and other troop supplies, especially in establish-
ing the national armies of the Associated States. In
this connection General de Lattre hoped to expand the
present strength of 25 battalions to 50 battalions.

2. Mr. ACHESON said that M. Mayer, French Finance
Minister, had discussed this matter with General Marshall
and had made a deep impression upon him. The need for
a solution was generally recognized. There was general
agreement on the principle as discussed during the
talks with M. Pleven, that France should continue to
be primarily responsible for Indochina, that U.S.
troops should not be used, and that first priority in
military aid should go to Indochina. This difficult
problem needed careful study, since funds directly
available for Indochina under the present aid program
were not sufficient. Both General Marshall and Mr. Foster
of ECA were examining’ all possible ways to find other
routes to reach the common goal. All that could be

. ~ loopy held in S/S-R. For.JCS position opposing

commitment in uIndochitia of US Yorces. "under.such circun-

stances an ouért Chinese Communist agsression", ‘see -

memorandum of JCS to Marshall “(Defense), Aug. 31, 1951,

top secret. ;
TSESCRETROY

452
