Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET -. Sensitive

worth noting. MACV's report gave central attention to the fact that the
political turbulence during the last quarter of 1963 had been reflected
in a regression in government control, and corresponding opportunities
for the VC. The political instability had resulted, especially, in a
decline of GVN control within the 13 provinces listed as critical at
Honolulu °8 20 November. The strategic hamlet program had received
setbacks which forced the GVN's military forces to adopt a defensive
posture. After this there came a somewhat equivocal statement that:

Analysis disclosed that, in spite of political
turbulence, a satisfactory tempo of operation was
maintained during this quarter. On the other hand,
statistics clearly supported previous convictions
that GVN operations were not effective when
judged by reasonable standards of results versus
effort expended. The immediate response to this
analysis is to focus the advisory effort at all
levels on the need for radical improvement in the
effectiveness of operations. 43

What this seems to say is that GVN operations were satisfactory
by the criteria which had been adopted for judging them, yet they
did not achieve results. This seems to amount to an admission that
the criteria by which operations were judged did not lead to good
judgments concerning the results that were being achieved by these
operations.

This appears, indeed, to have been very near the truth. Through-
out this report there was a recognition of the effect of political
and psychological and motivational factors upon real and effective
capabilities. On the matter of training, the assessment was that
it had "proven to be quantitatively satisfactory and flexible enough
to meet the pressures and accelerated time schedules." But this
expression of satisfaction that the nominal goals of training had been.
met was followed by the qualification that "the degree to which train-
ing can, in fact, develop combat aggressiveness or colpensate for the
jack of other motivation remains a matter for concern and continuing
scrutiny.” The anomaly was expressed in words, but the fact of it
seems to have gone almost. unrecognized.

When he turned to the two major areas of military action, first
in the north and center and later in the Delta, MACV was obliged to
admit that "there was little substantial progress toward completing
the military progress in either of the two major regions." But he
seemed to have been so thoroughly imbued with a chin-up, never-say-
die spirit that he rejected the pessimistic implications which he
explicitly acknowledged were present.

If the military aspects of the fourth quarter
of calendar year 1963 were viewed in isolation, or

sik TOP SECRET - Sensitive
