Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

initially composed of the ICP, Revolutionary Youth League, the New
Vietnam Party, and factions of the Vietnam Nationalist Party (VNQUD).
Membership was held open to any other individuals or groups willing to
join in struggling for "national liberation." The announced program

of the Viet Minh called for a wide range of social and political reforms
designed mainly to appeal to Viet patriotism. Enphasis was placed on
an anti-Japanese crusade and preparation for "an insurrection by the
organization of the people into self-defense corps," not on communist
cant.

Though a Kuomintang general originally sponsored the Viet Minh,
Ho soon became suspect, and in 1942 was jailed by the Chinese. While
he was in prison, probably to offset the Viet Minh's growing appeal, and
to assure tighter Chinese control of the Vietnamese, the KMT fostered a
rival Viet "popular front," the Vietnam Revolutionary League (Dong Minh
Hoi), which was based on the VNQDD, the Great Vietnam Netionalist Party
(Dai Viet), and a number of smaller groups, but was Supposed to include
the Viet Minh. In fact, however, the Dong Minh Hoi never acquired more
than a nominal control over the Viet Minh. In 1943, Ho was released
from prison and put in charge of the Dong Minh Hoi-~-a status apparently
conditioned on his accepting overall Chinese guidance and providing the
allies with intelligence. But as the war progressed, Ho and the Viet
Minh drew apart from the Dong Minh Hoi, and the latter never succeeded
in acquiring apparatus within Vietnam comparable to the Viet Minh's.

During the war, some Vietnamese political parties collaborated with
the Japanese or the Vichy French. These were put at a disadvantage during
and after the war in competition with the ICP, the Viet Minh, or the
Dong Minh Hoi--all of which developed an aura of unwavering faith to
resistance against all foreign domination. But only the ICP and the
Viet Minh established their reputations by extensive wartime operations
among the people of Vietnam. In Cochinchina, up until surfacing in
April 1945, the ICP continued to operate largely underground and without
much regard for the Viet Minh mantle; in Annam and Tonkin, however, all
ICP undertakings were given Viet Minh identity. Throughout Vietnam, the
IcP initiated patient political action: the dissemination of propaganda,
the training of cadres, the establishment of a network of cells dow to
hamlet level. The ICP was during the war the hard core of the Viet Minh,
but the bulk of the Viet Minh membership were no doubt quite unaware of
that fact: they served the Viet Minh out of a patriotic fervor.

The American 0.S.S. during World War II dealt with the Viet Minh
as the sole efficient resistance apparatus within Vietnam, depending
upon it for reliable intelligence, and for aid in assisting downed allied
pilots. However, the Viet Minh itself assigned priority to political
tasks ahead of these military missions. The first permanent Viet Minh
bases were established in 1942-43 in the mountains north of Hanoi. Only
after its political network was well established did it field its first
guerrilla forces, in September 1943. The first units of the Viet Minh
Liberation Army came into being on December 22, 1944, and there is little

B-3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
