Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET = Sensitive

within the armed forces, the very real possibility of a complete ARVN
collapse could not be excluded. COMUSMACV summarized the situation in
his 7 June cable to CINCPAC:

ARVN forces...are already experiencing difficulty in coping
with this increased VC capability. Desertion rates are
inordinately high. Battle losses have been higher than
expected; in fact, four ARVN battalions have been rendered
ineffective by VC action in the I and IT Corps zones.
Therefore, effective fighting strength of many infantry

and ranger battalions is unacceptably low. As a result,
ARVN troops are beginning to show signs of reluctance to
assume the offensive and in some cases their steadfastness
under fire is coming into doubt. 131/

If anything, Westmoreland's assessment may have been too generous. ‘The
next week the Viet Cong launched an attack on the new Special Forces
camp and adjoining district headquarters at Dong Zoai on the northwest
corner of War Zone D. ARVN forces were committed piecemeal to the
engagement and successively chewed wp by more than two regiments of
enemy troops. The battle lasted for five days and marked some of the
bitterest fighting of the war to that date. ‘The VC summer offensive
continued unabated through June and duly. On 25 June, the long expected
offensive in the central highlands began when a district headquarters at
Tou Morong in Kontum Province was overrun, reportedly by an NVA regiment
reinforced with local guerrillas. Other remote district capitals came
under attack in the following weeks and by 7 July a total of six had been
abandoned or overrun.

Casualties soared on both sides; ARVN alone sustained 1,672 in the
second week of June. But the important factor was the dangerous degrada-
tion of ARVN unit integrity. By the end of May, the heavy fighting had
rendered two ARVN regiments and three battalions combat ineffective by
MACV ratings. By 26 June, MACV was forced to rate-5 ARVN regiments and
9 separate battalions ineffective. 132/ Losses were so high that in
July, 11 of 15 ARVN training battalions had to be temporarily disorganized
to provide fillers for the line units. 133/ It was this major degradation
of unit effectiveness that evoked the alarm and sense of crisis in Saigon
and Washington and constituted the seemingly incontestable arguments in
favor of substantial American forces. ARVN units were defeated in most
cases by their own tactical ineptness, cowardice, and lack of leadership
rather than by overall weight of numbers or inferiority of firepower.

The U.S. advisory effort had sought to strengthen precisely these mili-
tary intangibles, in addition to equipping, training and generally sup-
porting ARVN troops. ‘These skills and qualities are, of course, difficult
to teach or impart, but a successful advisory effort must at some point
produce a force capable of engaging the enemy and defeating him when the
ratios of strength and firepower are roughly equal.

Far from finding many of its advisory teams finishing their task
and moving on to new areas or to new units, the U.S, found itself in

56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
