Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Hué on Buddha's birthday, May 8, in which nine people were killed and
another fourteen injured. Although Buddhists had theretofore been wholly
Quiescent politically, in subsequent weeks, a full-blown Buddhist "struggle"
movement demonstrated a sophisticated command of public protest techniques
by a cohesive and disciplined organization, somewhat belying the notion that
the movement was an outraged, spontaneous response to religious repression
and discrimination. Nonetheless, by June it was clear that the regime was
confronted not with a dissident religious minority, but with a grave crisis
of public confidence. The Buddhist protest had become a vehicle for mobiliz-
ing the widespread popular resentment of an arbitrary and often oppressive
rule. It had become the focal point of political opposition to Diem. Under
strong U.S. pressure and in the face of an outraged world opinion, the regime
reached ostensible agreement with the Buddhists on June 16. But the agree-
ment merely papered over the crisis, without any serious concessions by

Diem. This intransigence was reinforced by Diem's brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu,

and his wife, who bitterly attacked the Buddhists throughout the summer.

By mid-August the crisis was reaching a breaking point.

The Buddhists’ demonstrations and protest created a crisis for American
policy as well. The U.S. policy of support for South Vietnam's struggle
against the Hanoi-supported Viet Cong insurgency was founded on unequivocal
support of Diem, whom the U.S. had long regarded as the only national leader
capable of unifying his people for their internal war. When the Buddhist
protest revealed widespread public disaffection, the U.S. made repeated
attempts to persuade Diem to redress the Buddhist grievances, to repair
his public image, and to win back public support. But the Ngos were un-
willing to bend. Diem, in true mandarin style, was preoccupied with ques-
tions of face and survival -- not popular support. He did not understand
the profound changes his country had experienced under stress, nor did he
understand the requirement for popular support that the new sense of national-
ism had created. The U.S. Ambassador, Frederick Nolting, had conducted a
low-key diplomacy toward Diem, designed to bring him to the American way
of thinking through reason and persuasion. He approached the regime during
the first weeks of the Buddhist crisis in the same manner, but got no re-
sults. When he left on vacation at the end of May, his DCM, William Truechart,
abandoned the soft sell for a tough line. He took U.S. views to Diem not
as expressions of opinion, but as demands for action. Diem, however, re-
mained as obdurate and evasive as ever. Not even the U.S. threat to dissoci-
ate itself from GVN actions in the Buddhist crisis brought movement.

In late June, with Nolting still on leave, President Kennedy announced
the appointment of Henry Cabot Lodge as Ambassador to Vietnam to replace
Nolting in September. In the policy deliberations then taking place in
Washington, consideration was being given for the first time to what effect
a coup against Diem would have. But Nolting returned, first to Washington
and then to Saigon, to argue that the only alternative to Diem was chaos.
The U.S. military too, convinced that the war effort was going well, felt
that nothing should be done to upset the apple cart. So Nolting was given
another chance to talk Diem into conciliating the Buddhists. The Ambassador
worked assiduously at the task through July and the first part of August,
but Diem would agree only to gestures and half-measures that could not

ii TOP SECRET - sensitive
