Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

modern technology, new techniques for use against the Viet
Cong forces (approximately 4 U.S. personnel).

3. Assist the G.V.N. forces with health, welfare and
public work projects by providing U.S. Army civie action
mobile training teams, coordinated with the similar civilian
effort (approximately 14 U.S. personnel).

kh. Deploy a Special Forces Group (approximately 400 per-
sonnel) to Nha Trang in order to accelerate G.V.N. Special
Forces training. The first increment, for immediate deploy-
ment to Vietnam, should be a Special Forces company (52 per-
sonnel).

5. Instruct JCS, CINCPAC, and MAAG to undertake an assess-
ment of the military utility of a further increase in the G.V.N.
forces from 170,000 to 200,000 in order to create two new divi-
sion equivalents for deployment to the northwest border region.
The parallel political and fiscal implications should be
assessed. 29/ : f

In general Kennedy did not seem to have committed the U.S., by these
decisions, significantly further than the U.S. had already been committed
by the President's public speeches and remarks at press conferences. In
the expanded military aid program approved by the President, there was no
item that committed the U.S. any further than we had gone in the case of
Laos (that is, beyond providing advisors, materiel, and some covert com-
bat assistance).

A debatable exception was the decision to send hOO special forces
troops to speed training of their South Vietnamese counterparts. The idea
of sending some Green Berets antedates the Task Force effort. Rostow men-
tioned it in his April 12 memo, quoted above. It can be argued whether it
was really prudent to view this decision as separable from the "combat
troops” issue (which also were being considered nominally, at least, for
training, not necessarily combat). But obviously the President was sold on
their going, and since the Vietnamese Special Forces were themselves sup-
ported by CIA rather than the regular military aid program, it was possible
to handle these troops covertly. In any event, although there would even-
tually be 1200 Green Berets in Vietnam (before the first commitment of U.5.
combat units) they were apparently never cited as a precedent for or a
commitment to a more overt role in the war.

These, then, were the measures relating to military commitments under-
taken as a result of the April/May review. The principal objective of these
measures (together with the non-military elements of the program) as stated
in the Task Force report, and formally adopted in the NSAM, was “to prevent
Communist domination of Vietnam." There was no uncertainty about why these

) TOP SECRET - Sensitive
