Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

x

751G,00/12-2951:TOP SECRET FILE

"From point view effectivmess, Chinese intervention under
present forms can be intensified to point of upsetting, to

Viet advantage, equilibrium of opposing forces out of propor-

tion to known possibilities of Viet alone. French Govt in

this case wld also consider Chinese intervention as genuine
aggression.. |

"TI. is French Govt has already made known to US Govt, it wld,
in these eventualities, appeal to UN. It wld do so in agreement
with Associate Stetes Govts and wld not (rpt not) fail to
consult beforehand with US and UK.

application to China of political and economic sanctions under
UN. Charter. Finally it wld request member states to have their
available forces participate in defense Indochina territory.

"TTI. It wld ask China be declared aggressor and immediate \

"IV. If its request met Security Council veto, French wld \
request meeting GA. ‘

"vy. It is essentially on Atlantic Pact member countries and
British Commonwealth dominions of white race, as well as SEA
countries more directly threatened by Chinese aggression, that
French Govt wld consider itself able to count principally for
conduct military action recommended by UN. It wild furthermore
anticipate adherence to other measures by all UN member states
which have decided oppose Communist bloc aggressions in Asia
and elsewhere in world,

"French recourse to UN wld be effected without prejudice to. \
requests for immediate aid by French to US and UK.

"Massive increase Chinese aid to Viet wld clearly create situa-
tion whose sudden aggravation wld not (rpt not) permit awaiting
development slow UN procedures and wld call for immediate
decisions on strategic plane,.

"In contrary sense, it might happen that Chincse intervention wld
be of charagter insufficiently defined to have UN decision
interpose without very long discussion or. real character Chinese
aggression while extremely grave threat hanging over expeditionary
corpse

"With this double hypothesis in view French Govt continues
consider necessary speedy implementation Singaport con terence
recommendations,
"Tt is not
TOP SECRET

463
