Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Government in South Vietnam. In general terms this authority
is parallel to that set forth in my letter to Ambassador Taylor
of July 2, 1964." * 17/

Given his belief in the fundamental importance of the pacification
effort, Lodge was ready to push it at any time he could. He did not
examine the possibility that certain times were more favor2ble than
others for an effort which needed the full participation of the Viet-
namese in order to succeed, and, like many in the government, failed
to see that at certain times emphasis on pacification would not only
not work but would be harmful to GVN/US relations, and would reduce
the chances for 2 successful joint effort at some more propitious time.

Thus, it is not surprising that one of his last major documents at
the end of his first tour as Ambassador proposed Hop Tac (see I. A.) --
in the face of strong possibilities that the situation was not favorable
to it -- and that on his return in August 1965 he was advocating more
effort in pacification.

Thus, for example, meeting with his senior officers one month after
he arrived, Lodge “began the meeting by stating that in his opinion the
United States militery was doing so well not that "we face a distinct
possibility that VC main force units will be neutralized and that Vc
fortresses will be destroyed soon. We should be ready to handle the VC
in small units. This gives counter-subversion/terrorism or pacification
or counterinsurgency -- I am not overly concerned with what we call it --
a new urgency for all of us here.'" 18/

It is likely that if Lodge had clarified his view of pacification
and repeated it continually in public and privately, as he did with
anything he believed in, his view would eventually have taken hold in
the United States Mission. But the problem of how pacification should
work was -- and is -- a very difficult one. It raises a number of ex-
tremely difficult questions on which the United States Government has
never reached a unified position.

Sensing that Lodge was receptive to ideas which emphasized pacifica-
tion but that he had no set views on details, many groups and individuals
pesieged him with a resurgence of ideas and philosophies on pacification.
They were all encouraged by his verbal support or his glowing cables to
Washington. The whole atmosphere in the Mission became more favorable
towards pacification and pacifiers; Lansdale, Colonel Serong (the
Australian who was to organize the Police Field Force with support from

* The letter to Taylor had said, among other points: "I wish it clearly
' understood that this overall responsibility includes the whole mili-
tary effort in South Vietnam and authorizes the degree of command and
control that you consider appropriate."

9 b TOP SECRET - Sensitive
