Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

developed particularly rapidly in the period between the two world wars.
The Comminists early became influential therein although never numerous.
The Trotzkyist faction was strong and at one time controlled the Indo-
chinese Communist party.

The shattering defeat of France by Germany and the imuediately
following Japanese occupation of Indochina dealt a severe blow to French
prestige with the natives, while the early Japanese victories in the
Pacific extended this loss of face to all whites. Even though the
Annamese hated the Japs, five years of anti~western propaganda left per-
manent effects on the minds of the people.

In the final months of the war when defeat was inevitable,
Japanese leaders in Indochina deliberately created a situation which
would make the return of the French difficult by setting up a native
government and allowing arms to get into native hands. The allies had
contributed to this situation by parachuting arms and supplies to the
native underground fighting the Japanese. As in most occupied countries
both in Asia and Burope, the Communists were one of the most active and
best organized elements in this underground. Some months before the
Japanese surrender Ho Chi MINH returned secretly to Indochina. He has
had a long and prominent history as an Annamite revolutionary and a
Comintern agent under a variety of aliases, For the Communists there
was no question of his leadership; to others he was known as a lift long
fighter for independence who had returned from exile to lead his people,
He had around him a small group of able Communists trained as he was in
Moscow, or veterans of the Chinese Communist movement. Following the
then current popular front tactics, Ho organized a coalition of political
parties known as the Viet Minh League and set up a government in which
Communiet control was at first concealed.

Thus when after some delay the Chinese arrived in Tonkin and the
British in Saigon to disarm the Japanese troops, they found a native
government established and in control.

A more detailed account of events from this point on will be
found in the annex to this memorandem.

3. French Colonial Policy, Past and Present - While not always
clear or consistent, French colonial policy before the war was generally one
of assimilation. In its highest and simplest form, this was based on a com-
plete absence of color or race prejudice and a belief that the mission of
France was not to prepare her subject peoples for independence, but to
convert them to French civilization, culture, and religion and prepare
them to become French citizens and their homelands to become integral parts
of France. (Martinique and Guadaloupe were examples of the complete ap-

plication of this policy.)

This policy had been questioned even before the war and in 1943
General de Gaulle held a conference of colonial experts at Brazzaville
to consider postwar colonial problems. At this conference was born the
idea of the French Union which was to be a centralized colonial federa-
tion with varying degrees of local autonomy but with essential control

remaining in Paris.

160
