Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of a Canadian proposal to exchange a bombing halt for a redemilitarization
of the DMZ. The Chiefs adamantly opposed the idea as a totally inequitable
trade-off. We would sacrifice a valuable negotiating blue chip without
commensurate gain (such as a cessation of DRV infiltration). 175/ With
no other promising prospects for a diplomatic break-through, there was
little reason on that score to suspend even a part of the bombing at that
time.

The only other event that might have influenced the Secre-
tary's thinking was his trip to Vietnam July 7-12. With a decision on
the additional ground forces to be sent to Vietnam narrowing down, the
President sent McNamara to Saigon to review the matter with General
Westmoreland and reach agreement on a figure well below the 200,000
Westy had requested in March. As it turned out, the total new troops
in Program #5 were about 25,000. In the briefings the Secretary received
in Saigon, the Ambassador spoke briefly about the need for an effective
interdiction system which he hoped we would find in the barrier. He
reiterated most of the points he had made to Rusk by wire in June. 176/
CINCPAC's briefing on the air war began with the now standard self-
justifications based on denied requests for escalation. The body of
his presentation did contain some interesting new information, however.
For instance, Admiral Sharp confirmed that the increased effort in the NE
quadrant had not been at the expense of sorties elsewhere in North Vietnam
or Laos. ‘The decline in U.S, losses in the Red River valley was attribut-
able in part to the declining effectiveness of North Vietnam's MIG, SA-2,
and AAA defenses. This in turn was explained by better U.S. tactics, and,
most importantly, new weapons and equipment like the WALLEYE guided bomb,
the CBU-24 cluster bomb, the MK-36 Destructor and a much improved ECM
capability. The rest of his presentation was given over to complaints
about the unauthorized targets still on the JCS list and to the familiar
muddled arguments for not stopping the northern bombing because it was
pressuring Ho to behave as we wanted and because in some mysterious
fashion it was interdicting infiltration, actual statistics in the South
to the contrary notwithstanding. 177/

After 7th Air Force commander, General Momyer, had given
a glowing detailed account of the success of the new tactics and weapons
(a 4-fold increase in effectiveness against the NE RR in the previous
year), and the 7th Fleet had described its air operations, CINCPAC summed
up his arguments against any further limitations on the bombing. His
closing point, on which he based recommendations, was that both sides
were fighting both offensive and defensive wars. The DRV had the offensive
initiative in the South but we were on the defensive. However,

The opposite holds for the air war in the north. Here
we hold the initiative. We are conducting a strategic
offensive, forcing the enemy into a defensive posture. He
is forced to react at places and times of our choosing. If

78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

‘
