Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Trends Toward Military Officers as Province Chief's

No. Provinces No. Military Chiefs % Military Chiefs
1958 36 13 36
1960 36 21 38
1962 4a 36 88

There was a coextensive militarization of public administration at district
and lower levels.

3. Dissatisfaction in the Officer Corps

But if Vietnam's soldiers found the Diem family a way to
political power, wealth, and social prominence, they had ample reason to
be dissatisfied with Diem's intervention in their professional concerns.
The propensity of Ngo Dinh Diem to control his military with a tight rein
extended to deciding when and where operations would be conducted, with
what forces, and often how they would be used. Moreover, he involved
himself with the arming and equipping of the forces, showing a distinct
proclivity to heavy military forces of the conventional type, even for the
Civil Guard, which reinforced American military leanings in the same
direction. 105/ There were a few soldiers, like General Duong Van Minh,
who sharply disagreed with the President on both points. And there was
a growing number of young officers who resented the Catholic-Northern
dominant clique within the military, who were dissatisfied with Diem's
familial interference in military matters, and who were willing to enter-
tain notions that the GVN had to be substantially modified. Nonetheless,
until 1963, there was little apparent willingness to concert action
against Dien.

4. The Early Coup Attempts, 1960 and 1962

On November 11, 1960, three paratroop battalions stationed
in Saigon -- considered by Diem among his most faithful -- cooperated in
an attempted coup d'etat. The leadership consisted of 4 small group of
civilians and military officers: Hoang Co Thuy, a Saigon Lawyer; It Colonel
Nevyen Trieu Hong, Thuy's nephew; Lt Colonel Vuong Van Dong, Hong's brother
in law; and Colonel Nguyen Chanh Thi, the commander of the paratroops, who
was apparently brought into the cabal at the last moment. The coup failed
to arouse significant general pro-coup sentiment, either among the armed
forces, or among the populace. Troops marched on Saigon, and rebels sur-
rendered. 106/ In February, 1962, two Vietnamese air force planes
pombed the Presidential palace in an unsuccessful attempt on President
Diem and the Nhus -- properly, an assassination attempt rather than a
coup d'etat. 107,

But the abortive events of 1960 and 1962 had the effect of
dramatizing the choices open to those who recognized the insolvency of
Diem's political and military policies. When Diem was overthrown in
November, 1963, he was attacked by an apparatus that had been months in
planning, originating in a plot by three generals, Duong Van Minh, Tran

Ay TOP SECRET - Sensitive
