Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ee 3 Security Information _

2 Sl
ihe * Ma ‘

before the Fational J Assembly in Janarry ‘953 makes provision
supsort of the Fronch military effort in Indo-
ehing on a level commensurate with this ressonsitility.

"

(2) She o

"i
Cc
by
ty
5
Go.

td
ot
ce
o

the wiliiars sirussle oreserves tas

Agsociated Gtatas without which their e

parviones yould bo imnossitle. At the san 5 tie ate at aey te ene
ations meke 1% necessary to proces peers sae? alonz the path of
evolitionsry Gsvalomient. Frenece his faciliteted arrancesent for
consultations sron ths Asepeisted Otstes for rezulation of Se,
Own oconomic alisirs, includins tert?fs. Zleetiens to councils

et the pymmicipsl level as ths first ig in elsetion a a Hatis aaa”
Assendly wers hald in Vict-liem tn Janus F 1953- Considerable
elezents of opinion within the 4ssock ed Stetes were 5 euaae tier ed
with the rato of evolution or persisted in their altitude of scenti-«
cion texard French intenticns. The french are aware of this atti-
tude and are considsrins what further etens may ba taken.

(3) Franea has instituted a new systea of representation in
indochina by which France is ropresented by a Cormissioner Cenersl
end in exzch of the these Associvied Sintes by 2 tigh Commissioner.

(2)

aid prosran new .infay
troop wits ins Associa

1953_ the number of roculny troops in
States had eromm to about. 200,009 in ¥
23,900 in Casbodina, These fieures ca x

3 = Raat
&

Te AL pees Sana Pies aa os.
in Viet-lom the auxiliaries nusber spore

= of i sat al a aes = nm. ee pleas
ment of intssendent lovistical mv aduin
sas Pf tine weetiecbine + stor kes nehie
aPuiiSS Of tness SUarcs Can only o2 aecnze

“

(5) tha
in the ev eyeedtes o

United Ststes

to contri bite, Sena wrorress hes been mode OY i Etet a ie
necessery for effective aéninistraticn an ba achicved an end must
be brouzht to oe iL5% cellion and the authority of soverm-
Rant mist be e Ire Zt has not been exercised or
racomised, Tha m3 this far’ played the vrinci~
pak. role in atvis wiates on puotic acdvinistretion
but ths United ctate nission has reviz ssibla
means of cor #ribating to Tiseal and other accinistr =
and facilities for training younz officials in zover

: This

Security Inforse tion
