Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

42.

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Without U.S. support Diem almost certainly could not have con-
solidated his hold on the South during 1955 and 1956.

Without the threat of U.S. intervention, South Vietnam could not
have refused to even discuss the elections called for in 1956 under the
Geneva settlement without being immediately overrun by the Viet Minh armies.

Without U.S. aid in the years following, the Diem regime certainly,
and an independent South Vietnam almost as certainly, could not have sur-
vived.

Further, from 195) on there had been repeated statements of U.S.
support for South Vietnam of a sort that we would not find in our dealings
with other countries in this part of the world. It is true there was
nothing unqualified about this support: it was always economic, and
occasionally accompanied by statements suggesting that the Diem regime had
incurred an obligation to undertake reforms in return for our assistance.
But then, until 1961, there was no occasion to consider any assistance that
went beyond economic support and the usual sort of military equipment and
advice, and no suggestion that our continued support was in doubt.

Consequently, the U.S. had gradually developed a special commit-
ment in South Vietnam. It was certainly not absolutely binding, even at
the level of assistance existing at the start of 1961, much less at any
higher level the South Vietnamese might come to need or request. But the
commitment was there; to let it slip would be awkward, at the least.

Whether it really had any impact on later decisions is hard to say. Given
the other factors already discussed, it is not hard to believe that in its
absence, U.S. policy might have followed exactly the same course it has
followed. On the other hand, in the absence of a pre-existing special re-
lation with South Vietnam, the U.S. in 1961 possibly would have at least
considered a coalition government for Vietnam as well as Laos, and chosen
to limit direct U.S. involvement to Thailand and other countries in the area
historically independent of both Hanoi and Peking. But that is the mootest
sort of question. For if there had been no pre-existing commitment to South
Vietnam in 1961, there would not have been a South Vietnam to worry about
anyway +

ITI. SUMMARY

Looking over the context we have been reviewing, it seems like a
situation in which mistakes would be easy to make. The Viet Cong threat was
serious enough to demand action; but not serious enough to compete with other
erises and problems for the attention of senior decision-makers. A sound
decision on tactics and levels of commitment to deal with the Viet Cong in-
volved as much a judguent on the internal politics of non-communists in
Vietnam as it did a judgment of the guerrillas’ strength, and character,
and relation with Hanoi. (Even a judgement that the war could be treated as
a strictly military problem after all, involved at least an implicit judge-
ment, and a controversial one, about Vietnamese polities.) Even if Diem

7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
