Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

The Consul at Saigon (Reed) to the Secretary af State

SECRET Saracen, September 17, 1946—11 a.m,
[Received September 1S—1:03 a. m.]

374. Both Clarac and Chief of Sireté have informed me inere sase[ d]
Commuinistic activities in French Indochina are disquieting. Tnter-
cepted letters indicate Chinese Communists are entrenched in Chinese
centers Saigon and Taiphong and that Annamites chiefly in Tonkin
and Annam, but also to certain extent in Cochin China, are receiving
much Communist propaganda. Thev feel Viet Nam leaders not en-
tirely responsible for this apparent trend but point out those leaders
have Communist training and leanings. Clarac added that one dif-
fieulty in handling Communist problem is impossibility using word
“Communist” in regard to this movement as strength of Communist
party in France precludes any unfavorable mention. Both believed
continuance uncertainty Freneh-Viet Nain relations despite signing
provisional agreement will contribute to such activities but stressed

© See telegram 4671, ffrd.
Commnnists are already in French Indochina (no Russians) and
close watch over developments must be maintained as agencies outside
Frereh Fucoshitn are undoubtedly supplying propaganda.
This teleeram 374 to Department, repeated as 2 Nanking. Depart-
ment please repeat Paris.
Reep-

$51G.00/9-1746 3 Telegram
The Ambassador in Franch (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

CONFIDENTIAL Parts. September 17, 1946—5 p.
[Received September 17—3:24 p. m1
4671. Mt final conference with French September 14, Ho Chi Minh
signed joint declaration and modus rirend and departed few hours
later for Tow'on to sail for Saigon. Agreement will be submitted to
‘French Cabinet tomorrow ™ and after expected approval, given to”

The French Council of Ministers approved the agreement on September 18;
the text was fransmitted to Department in despate hh 6202, September 20, 1946,
from Paris: neither printed. E

press on September 19. Following are essentie] points of agreement
summerized from text obtained from Foreien Office.

Joint declaration emphasizes aereement of March 6, 1946, still in
effect but modus rérend? providing provisional solutions of urgent
problems was necessary until permanent and definitive agreement
could be reached. Date and procedure for referendum in Cochin
China is fo be fixed Jater. Tt is expeeted Fontainebleau conference
will be restirmod in January 1947,

Surmaries of numbered paragraphs of wodus rirendi follow:

1. Reciprocal “demioeratic™ rights for citizens of one country in
territory of other.

2. Revormition of reciprocal preperty rights. French property
ake tioned or seized in Viet Nan to be restored,

French schools to operate freely in Viet Num: Pasteur institute
to ibe vestored te French.

4. Viet Nam to give France priority when seeking advisors, tech-
nieiins or experts,

b, Pistre tied fo Freneh frane to be sinele enrreney for Indochina
with Banque de TTI ndochine as ter porary bank of issue.

80
