Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By; NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The GVN military budget was estimated at 57 billion piasters, while
the GVN civil budget was estimated at 40.1 billion piasters. The U.S.
expenditures were estimated to be as follows: US Military Personal
Expenditures, 16.9 billion piasters; US Military Official Purchases, 28.7
billion; Wege Increase for Local Personnel, 2.4 billion; US Mission
Civilian Housing, 1 billion; US Military Cantonments, 3 billion; Expen-
ditures of other US Agencies, 8 billion; and Non-Official Purchases,
i billion. With credit expansion and exports added in the total, monetary
creation projected for year 1967 was 175.9 billion piasters. Total
monetary absorption was estimated to be 131.8 billion piasters which left
an inflationary gap of 44.1 billion piasters. The message concluded:

We consider a gap of this magnitude to be unacceptable
in light of current U.S. policies. Mission currently studying
ways to reduce gap.

In answer to this news, the Department of State sent back a message
on 23 September. 4O/ It stated that the size of the inflationary gap
was "very disturbing," and tersely indicated that:

---much work needs to be done on policy side to get
US house in order in preparation for discussions with GVN
--.-Officiel US piaster spending estimated to be 45 billion
piasters. However /according to your message, U.S. expendi-
tures/, total 59.8 piasters, of which military expenditures
alone total 48.6 excluding US civilian housing project and any
portion 2.4 billion for wage increase for local military hire.
This would appear to represent 50% increase over present level
official US spending (including over 1/3 inerease in military
spending) which is certainly way out of line with stabiliza-
tion. Military spending figures also gross variance with
Quarterly ceilings imposed for the first half of CY 67 of’
9 billion piasters. hi/

Apparently, at this time Secretary McNamara was also becoming
interested in the piaster situation in Vietnam. On 22 September, the
JCS answered ho] @ question given them on 2 September by Secretary
of Defense with regard to a preliminary examination of the piaster
cost per man for the U.S. forces in Vietnam compared to those of GVN
forces. Their reply indicated that "the piaster costs per man for
U.S. forces rare Several times the magnitude of the joint support
piaster costs per man for GVN armed forces. [fiowever,/ since availeble
indicators [aia] not support a comparable ratio of combat effectiveness
per man, consideration purely on a pilaster cost basis might suggest
', increasing GVN armed forces strength in relation to U.S." On the other
hand, other considerations had indicated that "we may be near the upper
manpower limit on GVN armed forces strength." The Joint Chiefs indi-
cated they would "include appropriate consideration of potential piaster
cost tradeoffs in future recommendations with respect to the strength of
both US and GVN armed forces in Vietnam," but did not "foresee significant
piaster advantages as becoming available through feasible exchanges."

7O TOP SECRET - Sensitive
