Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

unless they felt they could count on Soviet support and that we could bring
great economic pressure to bear on the Chinese through our allies. While
expressing the opinion that Hanoi's renunciation of the Viet Cong would
"take the heart out of the insurgency," he indicated doubt that elimination
of North Vietnam's industrial targets would have much of an adverse impact
on it. Moreover, the Secretary acknowledged the possibility that such an
act "would have forfeited the 'hostage' which we hold in the North...with-
out markedly affecting the fight against the Viet Cong, at least in the
short run." 62/ ,

The major immediate outcome of the meeting was a decision to go ahead
with the suggestion to arrange for the visit of a third coumtry interlocu-
tor to Hanoi. On 30 April, Secretary Rusk visited Ottawa and obtained an
agreement from the Canadian Government to include such a mission among the
instructions for its new I1.C.C. representative. According to the per eemenss
the new official, J. Blair Seaborn, would: (1) try to determine Ho's atti-
fade toward Chinese support, whether or not he feels over-extended, and
his aims in South Vietnam; (2) stress U.S. determination to see its objec-
tives in South Vietnam achieved; (3) emphasize the limits of U.S. aims in
Southeast Asia and that it wanted no permanent bases or installations there;
and (4) convey U.S. willingness to assist North Vietnam with its economic
problems. Other results of the Saigon meeting consisted of a variety of
actions recommended by Secretary Rusk. Of these, only four were related
to the issue of military pressures against North Vietnan. These were recom-
mendations to (1) engage "more flags" in efforts directly supporting the
GVN; (2) deploy a carrier task force to establish a permanent U.S. navel
presence at Cam Ranh Bay; (3) initiate anti-junk operations that would "inch
northward" along the Vietnam coast; and (4) enlist SEATO countries in an
effort to isolate the DRV from economic or cultural relations with the =
World. 63/

D. Conflict of Short and Long Term Views: Caution Prevails

During the last week of April and the early weeks of May, the con-
tention between those urging prompt measures and those counseling a delib-
erate, cautious pacing of our actions continued. For example, Walt Rostow
urged Secretary Rusk to consider how difficult it would be to make a cred-
ible case in support of actions to force Hanoi's adherence to the Geneva
Accords if political deterioration took place in Laos and South Vietnam.
Predicting such an eventuality in the coming months, he implied that the
necessary actions should be taken soon. 64/ Similarly, Ambassador Lodge
continued to advocate prompt implementation of his carrot and stick approach
including, if VC provocations warranted, a well-timed reprisal just prior
to Commissioner Seaborn’s arrival in Hanoi. These views were communicated.
to Secretary McNamara and William Sullivan during their visit to Saigon,
12-13 May, and confirmed in a cable to the President three days later. 65/

The JCS commented on the final version of the State-ISA political-

military scenarios and criticized them for not including the more immediate
actions requested in NSAM 268: namely, border control and retaliatory

18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
