Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

on the other side of the case. The introduction of a U.S.
division obviously increases U.S. involvement in the counter-
insurgency, exposes greater forces and invites greater losses.
It will raise sensitive command questions with our GVN allies
and may encourage them to an attitude of "let the United
States do it." It will increase our vulnerability to Com-
munist propaganda and Third Country criticism as we appear
to assume the old French role of alien colonizer and con-
queror. Finally, there is considerable doubt that the number
of GVN forces which our action would relieve would have any
great significance in reducing the manpower gap.

"It is possible to reach a conclusion with regard to the
overall merit of this action without first examining in some
detail the possible missions which could be- assigned a U.S.
division. There are two obvious possibilities; the first,
the assignment of the division to one or more of the provinces
of the high plateau where the climate is good, the terrain
relatively open, and the Montagnard population more readily
distinguishable from the alien Viet Cong. Here, our forces
could utilize their mobility and firepower effectively and make
an important contribution in cutting off the growing infiltra-
tion into and through this area. For the most part, the
Montagnards are friendly to the U.S. and our forces would thus
be operating in a relatively friendly environment.

"On the other hand, such a mission in the highlands would
place our forces in an area with highly exposed lines of com-
munication leading to the coast. Their location in this area
would create serious logistic problems because of the diffi-
culty of the movement of land transport through areas infested
by the Viet Cong. There would be problems both of reinforce-
ment and of withdrawal because of this precariousness of land
communications. Finally, the GVN may question the introduc-
tion of sizeable U.S. forces into the Montagnard area where
we have often been accused of favoring the Montagnards over
the Vietnamese and of encouraging Montagnards separatism.

"The other role which has been suggested for U.S. ground
forces is the occupation and defense of key enclaves along
the coast such as Quang Ngai, Qui Nhon, Tuy Hoa and Nha Trang.
' Such a disposition would have the advantage of placing our
forces in areas of easy access and egress with minimum logis-
tic problems associated with supply and maintenance. The
presence of our troops would assure the defense of these in-
portant key areas and would relieve some GVN forces for em-
ployment elsewhere. The troops would not be called upon to
engage in counterinsurgency operations except in their own
local defense and hence would be exposed to minimum losses.

J ST TOP SECRET - Sensitive
