Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

info as well as psychological operations in the field and against

the DRV), the Director of USOM and the CAS Station Chief. We

established an Executive Secretary who was first Bill Sullivan
and later Jack Herfurt,who was charged with the preparation of
agenda, the recording of decisions, and, nost importantly,
following up and monitoring of decisions that were taken.

We met regularly once a week (with occasional special meetings

. a8 required), with paper circulated beforehand insofar as
possible. One of the responsibilities of the Executive Secre-
tary was to see that issues were worked out beforehand at

staff level insofar as possible and the remaining issues

clearly defined....It was normally our practice to keep all

members of the Council fully informed and to discuss all questions,

regardless of their sensitivity....After an informal exchange

of views, we took up questions on the agenda, doing our best

to obtain the consensus of all members. When in rare cases

this was not achieved, the Ambassador of course took the

decision. We considered the full range of questions, including

such fundamental ones as when and under what circumstances we
should bomb the North...ete...Below the Mission Council level

we established a series of committees in problem areas involving

more than one agency of the mission, chaired by the agency of

primary interest. These committees were responsible directly

to the Mission Council....We persuaded the GVN, on its side,

to set up a similar organization that was first called the

'Pacification Council' and later the ‘Rural Construction

Council.'....Zhe GVN Council and the Mission Council met to-

gether once a week with an agenda prepared beforehand by the

two Executive Secretaries...One of my theories, and to a degree

I think it was borne out in Saigon, was that the Mission Council

and the Joint Council were important not so much for what was in

fact decided at the meetings but for the fact that their

existence, and the necessity of reporting to them, acted as a

spur to the staff people to get things done and to resolve

issues at their level. Organization structure of course does

not assure brilliant performance, but I do take some satis-

faction in feeling that, due to the organizational structure

that we established, we established the habit of the Mission

elements and the GVN and the Mission, working together in a

more effective way." 36/

Whether or not the system described by Ambassador Johnson above
really worked the way he says it was supposed to is not the subject of
this study. But it appears that within a few nonths after Lodge
returned as Ambassador the people within the USG advocating reorganiza-
tion as at least a partial solution to the problems of the Mission were
once again in full cry.

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
