Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But the most worrisome example to those at the State Department who
lined up against any kind of accommodation was the Sainteny Mission
to Hanoi.

d. Sainteny or Ely?

Jean Sainteny, credited with reaching short-lived
independence accords with Ho Chi Minh in March 196, was sent back to
Hanoi in August 1954 to find ways to protect French business and
cultural interests in Tonkin. 59/ Sainteny's past success at rapproche-
ment gave the mission definite political overtones. General Ely wished
Paris had sent a "stupid type of consular official" not a man of Sainteny's
"active stripe"; he was disturbed enough to fly to Paris to tell Mendes-
France he would resign if French policy was to play a “double game” in
North and South Vietnam aimed at backing whichever side ultimately won.
Mendes-France assured Ely that French policy was to give maximum support
to the anti-Communist elements in South Vietnam and do everything possible
to assure their victory in 1956. Ely was placated and returned to Saigon.
But Sainteny remained in Hanoi and maximum support for Diem did not
materialize. 60/

From another source came word that Ely was not "au
courant" with French policy. French Union Counsellor Jacque Raphael-
Leygues, reportedly a meniber of the Mendes-France "brain trust" on Indo-
china, told Ambassador Dillon that Sainteny had convinced Paris that
South Vietnam was doomed and the "only possible means of salvaging any-
thing was to play the Viet Minh game and woo the Viet Minh away from
Communist ties in the hope of creating a Titoist Vietnam which would co-
operate with France and might even adhere to the French Union." Raphael-
Leygues said France deferred to U.S. wishes over which government to
support in Saigon’to get money for the French Expeditionary Corps and
to fix responsibility for the eventual loss of South Vietnam on the U.S. 61/

In December 1954, Sainteny won Ho Chi Minh's agreement
to permit French enterprises to carry on without discrimination. But if
the contract pleased Paris it did not assure French businessmen in Tonkin.
Viet Minh legislation would regulate their operations; profits could not
be transferred outside the Communist orbit. Most French concerns decided
potential benefit was not worth the risk of doing business with the DRV
and despite Sainteny's efforts to establish mixed government-private
corporations, most withdrew from the North. 62/ Sainteny remained as a
"general delegate" to the DRV.

e. The Mansfield Report

A final spur to U.S. action was the Mansfield Report.
After a fact-finding trip to South Vietnam, Senator Mansfield concluded

16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

