Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

62. letter from Secretary Rusk to 100 Student Leaders, January 4, 1967;
"Secretary Rusk Redefines United States Policy on Viet-Nam for
Student Leaders," Department of State Bulletin, January 23, 1967,
p. 133.

* * *
"There is no shadow of doubt in my mind that our vital interests
are deeply involved in Viet-lNam and in Southeast Asia.

"We are involved because the nation's word has been given that we
would be involved. On February 1, 1955, by a vote of 82 to 1 the United
States Senate passed the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty. That
Treaty stated that aggression by means of armed attack in the treaty area
would endanger our own peace and safety and, in that event, 'we would act
+o meet the common danger.' There is no question that an expanding armed
attack by North Viet-Nam on South Viet-Nem has been under way in recent
years; and six nations, with vital interests in the peace and security of
the region, have joined South Viet-Nam in defense against that armed
attack.

"Behind the words and the commitment of the Treaty lies the lesson
learned in the tragic half century since the First World War. After that
war our country withdrew from effective world responsibility. When aggres-
- gors challenged the peace in Manchuria, Ethiopia, and then Central Europe
during the 1930's, the world community did not act to prevent their success.
The result was a Second World War--which could have been prevented.”

Te oe ae

"In short, we are involved in Viet-Nam because we know from painful
experience that the minimum condition for order on our planet is that
aggression must not be permitted to succeed. For when it does succeed,
the consequence is not peace, it is the further expansion of aggression.

"And those who have borne responsibility in our country since 1945
have not for one moment forgotten that a third world war would be a
nuclear war."

A

63. The State of the Union Address of President Johnson to the Congress
(Excerpts), January 10, 19673 Depsrtment of State Bulletin, January 30,
1967, p- 155.

. * * *
"We are in Viet-Nam because the United States of America and our

allies are committed by the SEATO Treaty to ‘act to meet the common dan-
ger' of aggression in Southeast Asia. —

D-98
