Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Department of State also prepared papers on the following
subjects:

a. Introductory Paper on Key Elements in the Situation 27/
b. Probable Soviet, Chinese, Western European Reactions 28/

ec. Ambassador Thompson's Cable on Soviet Reactions to
Possible U.S. Government Courses of Action 29/

d. European and Other Non-Asian Reactions to Major Force
Increases 30/

e. Asian Reaction to a Major U.S, Force Increase 31/
£. Options on our Negotiating Posture 32/

These papers were presented to the Clifford Group at the meeting on
3 March 1968. However, as will be seen, they were quickly overtaken by
the rapidly moving situation and, with the exception of the paper on nego-
tiating options, did not figure in the final memorandum which was forwarded
to the President on 4 March.

General Maxwell Taylor's paper on alternative courses of action is
of greater interest in that it was furnished both to the Clifford Working
Group and to the White House directly through General Taylor's capacity
as Military Advisor to the President. Although it is not known what weight
was given to this paper, it was received by the President even prior to the
Memorandum from the Clifford Group, and thereby could have gained some
special weight in the deliberations of the President.

After a brief listing of the U.S. objectives in SVN, General Taylor
concluded that, since there was no serious consideration being given at the
moment to adding to or subtracting from our present objective, the discussion
should be limited to considerations of alternative strategies and programs
to attain that objective. 33/

General Taylor concluded that, basically, our government had only two
choices:

a. We can tell General Westmoreland that he must make do
with his present forces in Viet-Nam and ask him to report to
us what he is capable of accomplishing therewith. This would
be an invitation to him to cut back sharply upon the military
objectives he has defined in his latest Combined Campaign
Plan (1968). Alternatively, while making this decision to
provide no further forces, we could give new strategic
guidance to General Westmoreland which would assist him in
establishing the priorities for his efforts necessary to
pring his mission within capabilities of the forces allotted
him. :

*

22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
