Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

possible Chinese intervention. London, therefore, was only willing to
consider the establishment of a collective defense alliance in Southeast
Asia after the Geneva Conference. France saw Dulles' proposal for united
action as a parry of the urgent French request for immediate U.S. inter-
vention at Dien Bien Phu. Initially, the French feared that united action
would internationalize the war and thereby place it beyond control of
Faris. Later, the French came to fear that united action would be used

as a device to impede negotiations. For these reasons, the American
proposal for united action failed to gather support either in Paris or

in London before Geneva.

e. U.S. Discourages Early Cease-fire

In the months before the conference, the U.S. maintained.
an adamant opposition to any course other than full prosecution of the
war. Dulles told French Ambassador Henri Bonnet on 3 April, for instance,
that a negotiated settlement would lead only to face-saving formulae
for either a French or a Viet Minh surrender. The Secretary termed
a division of Indochina "impractical" and a coalition government the
"beginning of disaster." Writing to Chruchill on 4 April, Eisenhower
echoed this line, asserting: "There is no negotiated solution of the
Indochina problem which in essence would not be either a face-saving
device to cover a French surrender or a face-saving device to cover a
communist retirement." And it was precisely to bring about the latter --
China's "discreet disengagement" -- that the President wanted British
cooperation in "united action." 4/ .

The U.S. was concerned that a disaster at Dien Bien Phu
would propel the French into acceptance of an immediate cease-fire
even before the conference could begin. Dulles obtained assurances
from Bidault that the French would not adopt that approach. 5/ The
British did not share U.S. fears. Eden doubted that a cease-fire would
lead either to a massacre of the French or to large-scale infiltration
of French-held terrain by Viet Mikb forces. 6/

A-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
