Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

SE TOP SECRET - Sensitive

avoid populated areas; select weapons with optimum ballistic character-
istics for precision; make maximum use of ECM support in order to hamper
SA-2 and AAA radars and reduce "pilot distraction" during the strikes;

and employ the most experienced pilots, thoroughly briefed. He added

that NVN had an excellent alert system, which would provide ample time

for people to take cover. In all, he expected "under 50" civilian
casualties. 172/ (This was the Joint Staff estimate, too, but CIA in

its 8 June report estimated that civilian casualties might run to 200-300.)

McNamara cabled his approval of the measures suggested and indi-
cated that they would be included in the execute message. He stressed
that the President's final decision would be greatly influenced by the
ability to minimize civilian casualties and inquired about restrictions
against flak and SAM suppression that might endanger populated areas. 173/
On June 16, CINCPAC offered further assurances that all possible measures
would be taken to avoid striking civilians and that flak and SAM suppression
would be under the rightest of restrictions. 174/

The stage was thus set, and when the feedback from the Ronning
mission revealed no change in Hanoi's position, events moved quickly.

On 22 June the execution message was released. 175/ It auth-
orized strikes on the 7 POL targets plus the Kep radar, beginning with
attacks on the Hanoi and Haiphong sites, effective first light on 24 June
Saigon time. :

The execution message is a remarkable document, attesting in
detail to the political sensitivity of the strikes and for some reason
ending in a "never on Sunday" injunction. The gist of the message was
as follows:

Strikes to commence with initial attacks against
Haiphong and Hanoi POL on same day if operationally
feasible. Make maximum effort to attain operational
surprise. Do not conduct initiating attacks under mar-
ginal weather conditions but reschedule when weather
assures success. Follow-on attacks authorized as opera-
tional and weather factors dictate.

At Haiphong, avoid damage to merchant shipping. No
attacks authorized on craft unless US aircraft are first
fired on and then only if clearly North Vietnamese. Piers
servicing target will not be attacked if tanker is berthed
off end of pier. i

Decision made after SecDef and CJCS were assured every
feasible step would be taken to minimize civilian casual-
ties would be small. If you do not believe you can accom-
plish objective while destroying targets and protecting

125 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
