Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET ~ SENSITIVE

non-military economic aid was furnished in the form of "commodity
imports," an arrangement in which the U.S. purchased imports for
Vietnamese who paid for them in Vietnamese currency into a "counter-
part fund." The counterpart funds, in turn, were made available for
support of the GYN budget -- in 1956, 51% of all GVN expenditures
were for defense.

T- Implications: U.S. Role

Much criticism leveled at U.S. assistance for the GVN
has cited its military character as evidence that the U.S. deliberately
undermined or ignored the Geneva Settlement. SEATO has been similarly
suspect, its formation having drawn an immediate DRV protest to the
ICC in September 1954, that the treaty violated Article 19 of the
"Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities..." forbidding alliances. 107/
However, U.S. official records reveal that the nature and direction of
U.S. aid programs, with their emphasis on security, were dictated by
no conscious effort to contravene the Settlement, but by the desires of
the GVN, and by a mutual adjustment to the circumstances of French with-
drawal. In late 1954, J. Lawton Collins, the U.S, Special Representative
in Vietnam, recommended an ARVN of 77,000 and reported the French willing
to have MAAG expand slowly beyond the Settlement-fixed mid-1954 level of
342. 108/ The JCS initially (September, 195) viewed the Settlement as
too restrictive, and enjoined against MAAG's accepting the mission of
training RVNAF. However, Defense eventually took the view that while
State Department would have to rule on a possible increase in MAAG
strength, its 342 personnel were probably "capable of furnishing training
assistance to develop Army and Navy internal security forces...." The
build-up of DRV forces was perceived, and the JCS view was that this
threat entailed retention of at least four divisions of French forces in

the South until they could be replaced by combat effective RVNAF divisions.

There followed a period of about six months, December 1954 to May 1955, in
which the U.S. government debated within its councils whether or not to
throw its entire support behind Ngo Dinh Diem, or to seek alternatives.
However, while this debate was in progress, the U.S. followed through in
adopting direct aid to GVN, and in-:extending its advisory effort with ARVN
to replace French advisors -- steps explained as authorized by the Geneva
Agreement in terms of rotation of personnel, and of implementing a 1950
pentalateral agreement for military aid among the U.S., France, Laos,

109/

Cambodia, and Vietnam. 110/ Ultimately, Ngo Dinh Diem's success in breaking

the power of the sects, as well as the inability of Americans to identify
other leaders for the GVN, won him unequivocal American political support
and agreement to support an RVNAPF of about 150,000. Thus buttressed, Diem
refused to open consultations on the plebescite in July 1955, and in
October held an election of his own in which Bao Dai was deposed, and
himself installed as head of state of the GVN. Diem then felt confident
in requesting the French to remove their forces from Vietnam. The French

withdrawal came certainly before ARVN was ready to replace the Expeditionary

Corps divisions, and created urgency for MAAG to help develop minimal con-
ventional defense capabilities.

28 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE
