Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

More importantly, however, these officials finally came to the realization
that no military strategy could be successful unless a South Vietnamese
political and military entity was capable of winning the support of its
people. Thus, for the first time, U.S. efforts were to be made contingent
upon specific reform measures undertaken by the GVN, and U.S. leverage was
to be used to elicit these reforms. South Vietnam was to be put on notice
that the limit of U.S. patience and commitment had been approached.

Concerning negotiations and the bombing of the North, the Memorandum
for the President was conventional. No changes in our negotiating position
were recommended and no really new diplomatic initiatives were suggested.
Concerning the bombing of the North, the only issue indicated concerned
the degree of intensification. There was no mention made of a partial reduc-
tion or cessation.

Thus, faced with a fork in the road of our Vietnam policy, the Working
Group failed to seize the opportunity to change directions. Indeed, they
seemed to recommend that we continue rather haltingly down the same road,
meanwhile consulting the map more frequently and in greater detail to insure
that we were still on the right road.

6. The Climate of Opinion

This memorandum was presented to the President on Monday evening,
hk March, and at his request, the recommendations were passed to General
Westmoreland for his comments. These comments were received by the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and passed to the Secretary of Defense on
8 March 1968. General Westmoreland welcomed the additional airpower which
"would greatly enhance the tactical air support available to ground units."
The chairman indicated, however, that there had been no change in General
Westmoreland's requirements as originally proposed and, indeed, additional
eombat service-support forces had been requested.

General Westmoreland states that although immediate
authorization for deployment of 22,000 additional personnel
would provide much needed combat and combat support forces,
the combat service support forces now in Vietnam are insuffi-
cient to support our present force structure. This is especi-
ally critical in view of the recent deployment of the 3rd
Brigade of the 82d Airborne Division and RLT 27 to the I Corps
tactical zone without the appropriate slice of combat support.
He emphasizes the absolute reduirement to provide the support
forces identified with the increased deployments prior to or
at the same time the tactical forces are deployed. In this
regard, General Westmoreland has this date forwarded his
specific strength recommendations for the immediate essential
combat service support forces to provide adequate support for
combat units in I CTZ, including the 3rd Brigade of the 82d
Airborne Division, RLT 27 and Army units which have been

redeployed to Northern I Corps tactical zone. This request

64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
