Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was still "tit-for-tat". The White House statement stressed the phrase
"appropriate reprisal action" and, likening it to the Gulf of Tonkin
incident, characterized the response as similarly “appropriate and
fitting.” |

The idea of equivalent punishment was conveyed by confining the
strikes to a quite limited number of targets plausibly associated with
infiltration. Thus the possibility was left open that these reprisals
were strictly one-shot operations that would be carried out only in the
event of spectacular enemy actions. But the public language wes both
ominous and ambiguous: "As the U.S. Government has frequently stated,
we seek no wider war. Whether or not this course can be maintained lies
with the North Vietnamese aggressors." In fact, however, there was little
expectation, that the North Vietnamese would "cease theiz aggression,”
and every expectation that the U.S. would go beyond a policy of event-
associated reprisals. For immediately following. the first press release,
the White House issued another significant presidential statement, order-
ing what hed long been recommended:

"eel have directed the orderly withdrawal of American
dependents from South Vietnam...We haveno choice now but to
clear the decks and make absolutely clear our continued de-
termination to back South Vietnam..." 42/

And as further indication that much more than a mere occasional reprisal

was in the offing, McNamara met with the JCS on the following day to

request that they prepare and submit to him their recommendations for

an eight-week air strike campaign against infiltration-associated tar-

gets in the lower portion of North Vietnam as a sustained reply to any
ther provocations. 43/ :

D. An Act of Defiance

The flashing red warning signals -- if that is what they were --
were not heeded by Hanoi. On the contrary, in what was regarded by some
observers as a calculated act of defiance, the VC staged another dramatic
attack on 10 February, this one against a US enlisted men's billet in
Qui Nhon, inflicting the heaviest single loss of American personnel yet.
Within 24 hours, US and South Vietnamese aircraft executed the largest
_ retaliatory air strike of the war up to that time. Named FLAMING DART II,

28 VNAF A-1H's and 20 USAF F-100's hit Chap Le. Simultaneously, Navy
aircraft struck Chanh Hoa not far from Dong Hoi, just north of the DMZ.

This time, significantly, the strikes were not characterized as
a reprisal linked to the immediate incident. Instead, the White House
release of February 11, 44/ listed a long series of VC incidents and
attacks that had occurred since February 8, most of which were not
"spectacular" but quite normal features of the Vietnam war. The state-
ments moreover characterized the US air strikes as a more generalized

ea § TOP SECRET - Sensitive
