Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.

"Tf that is their decision, then a Western Pacific Manich would
not buy us peace or security. It would encourage the aggressors. It
would dismay our friends and allies there. If history teaches any-
thing, appeasement would make it more likely thet we would have to
fight a major war.

"Congress has made clear its recognition that the security of
the Western Pacific is vitel to the security of the United States
and that we should be firm. The Senate has ratified, by overwhelming
vote, security treaties with the Republic of China covering Formosa
and the Pescadores, and also the Republic of Korea. We heve a mutual
security treaty with the Republic of the Philippines, which could be
next in line for conquest if Formose fell into hostile hands. These
treaties commit the United States to the defense of the treaty areas.
In addition, there is a Joint Resolution which the Congress passed in
January 1955 dealing specifically with Formosa and the offshore islands
or Free China in the Formosa Straits.

"At that time the situation was similar to what it is today.

"Congress then voted the President authority to employ the armed
forces of the United States for the defense not only of Formosa but
of related positions such as Quemoy and Matsu, if I believed their
defense to be appropriate in assuring the defense of Formosa.

"T might add that the mandate from the Congress was given by an
almost unanimous bipartisan vote.

"Today, the Chinese Communists announce, repeatedly and officially,
thet their militery operations against Quemoy are preliminary to attack
on Formosa. So it is clear that the Formosa Straits Resolution of 1955
applies to the present situation.

"If the present bombardment and harassment of Quemoy should be
converted into a major assault, with which the locel defenders could
not cope, then we would be compelled to face precisely the situation
that Congress visualized in 1955.

"I have repeatedly sought to make clear our position in this matter
so that there would not be danger of Communist miscalculation. ‘The
Secretary of State on September fourth made 4 statement to the same
end. This statement could not, of course, cover every contingency.
Indeed, I interpret the Joint Resolution es requiring me not to make
absolute advance commitments, but to use my julgment according to the
circumstances of the time. But the statement did carry a clear mean-
ing to the Chinese Communists and to the Soviet Union. There will be
no retreat in the face of armed ageression, which is part and percel
of a continuing program of using armed force to conquer new regions.

.

B-39
