17

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

enslavement, then I believe that they will rally to the cause to which we
have given our support and our commitment.

"y pelieve that we must build our country well, also. Senator Douglas
described what we are attempting to do. The burdens are heavy upon us.
We have to make tis society an exemple to the world, strong enough to
serve not only as an example but strong enough to maintein the commitments
that we have assumed."”-

et £
9. President Kennedy's Presidential News Conference, May 5, 1961, Public
Papers of the Presidents, Kennedy, 1901, p. 356:
x € *

"9. ‘There have been reports that you would be prepared to send
American forces into South Vietnam if thet became necessary to prevent
Communist domination of that country. Could you tell us whether that is
correct and also anything else you have regarding plans for that country?

"A, ‘Well, we have had a group working in the Government and we've had
a Security Council meeting about the problems which are faced in Vietnam
by guerrillas and by the barrage which the present Government is being sub-
jected to. The problem of troops...the matter of what we're going to do to
assist Vietnam to obtain its independence it...a matter still under con-
sideration!..."

eee ae

10. Joint Communique Issued at Saigon by the Vice President of the United
States and the President of eae May 13, 191, Department of
State Bulletin, June 19, 1961 56:

"The United States, for its part, is conscious of the determination,
energy and sacrifices which the Vietnamese people, under the dedicated
leadership of President Ngo Dinh Diem, have brought to the defense of
freedom in their land.

"The United States is also conscious of its responsibility and duty,
in its own self-interest as well as in the interest of other free peoples,
to assist a brave country in the defense of its liberties against unprovoked
subversion and Communist terror. It has no other motive than the detense
of freedom.”

11. President Kennedy's Special Message to Congress, May 25, 1961, Public
Pavers of the Presidents, Kenne 1961: ;
"The great battleground for the defense and expansion of freedom today
is the whole southern half of the globe -- Asia, Latin America, Africa and

*

. C-1l
