CO

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was this Conference being held at Honolulu; the combined
headquarters of all American forces in Pacific was there.

"...6. Comment

"As can be seen, the Secretary let Khanh develop
his ideas fairly fully and do most of the telking.* Khanh
talked firmly and effectively, and responded well to the
Secretary's several points. He showed clearly that he was /
aware of the gravity of the decisions (tho he did seem a
touch cavalier about the political problems of hitting eastern
Iaos at once), and did not seem to want a firm U.S. answer
the day after tomorrow. But it seemed clear that he did
want it pretty soon, and was now convinced he could not
win in Secuth Vietnam without hitting other areas including
the North. He was careful to point out that the pacifica-
tion campaign was making gains and would continue do so.
Still, it was essentially defensive.

"On the timing, the Secretary said that any
action would be preceded in any event by some period of time
for force deployments, (He did not refer to diplomatic
steps re laos, the UN side, the U.S. Congressional problem,
or other types of factors). Khanh understood this, and
also accepted the Secretary's point that we would need to
consult very closely with Khanh himself, try to bring the
British and Australians aboard (the Secretary referred only
to these two possible active participants), and generally
synchronize and work out the whole plan with great care." 77/

Thus although the USG had pressed GV on many details of economic
lich: administration, and pacification, contacts at the highest level
told GVN that if the Vietnamese leaders would only stick together to prose-
cute the war, and if we compelled the North Vietnamese to cease and desist,
everything would be all right. Provided the GVN didn't embarrass the USG
too much, there was no limit to how far we would go to support them; and
apart from “unity” and a reasonable show of effort, there was no onus on
them to deliver the goods. Khanh's claim that he could not win without
extending the war, and that the Vietnamese were tired of the long dreary
grind of pacification, met no U.S. objection.

7. The Honolulu Conference and Its Follow-Up, June, 1064

The Honolulu Conference met on short notice with an air of urgency;
principals included McNamara, Rusk, Lodge, Taylor, and Westmoreland.
Presentations of the current situation preceded consideration of additional:
measures to be taken. Lodge briefed those present on the political status.
He said the situation could "jog along," but he thought that some external
action would be a big lift to South Vietnamese morale. Lodge's prediction
was more optimistic than later events, in August, proved justified; he said
"af we bombed Tchepone or attacked the [avn torpedo] boats end the Vietnamese
people knew about it, this would...unify their efforts and reduce [their]
quarreling." In reply to a question by Rusk, he opposed the idea of a more

———$—— eee er eae
*Comment: Nevertheless, as can be seen, the Secretary spoke freely.

25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
