Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of Vietnam were to be sanctioned, the result would not
be peace but only a pause before fresh hostilities...
Partition would therefore mean sooner or later --
probably sooner -- a renewal of war." 21/

On 29 May, speaking in rebuttal to the DRV delegation, Quoc
Dinh stated, "it is impossible for a people to accept of its own free will
a mutilation of its country...No Vietnamese patriot could accept partition."
This marked the fourth successive meeting in which the GVN delegate empha-
sized his country’s point of view on partition, elections, or both subjects.
This emphatic repetition continued. In the Seventh Plenary Session, on
10 June, speaking of a statement made by Molotov, Quoc Dinh accused the
USSR of laboring under certain misunderstandings of the GVN and, for the
fifth time since tabling his proposals, he repeated the DRV position:

"I noted in his statement...what I suppose was
a mistake of inadvertent omission. He said that
only the Viet Minh delegation had proposed that
a free general election should take place in Viet-
nam. I'm sorry that I must contradict. The Dele-
gation of the State of Vietnam also had the honor
to propose such elections; the difference being
that, whereas the Delegation of Viet Minh proposed
that there should be no international supervision
which, in the present circumstances, means that
elections could not possibly be honest and true,
the Delegation of the State of Vietnam has proposed
that elections should take DES under international
supervision." 22/

* Quoe Dinh then reasserted the complete independence of GVN from France,
referring to the treaty of 4 June 1954. A week later, the Vietnamese
delegate was again pushing his case on the floor of the conference:

"As regards the independence of our country,
it is a well-known fact that we have indicated the
contents of two treaties we had with the French
on that...As regards the elections, we ourselves,
in our proposal of May 12, have taken the initiative
of proposing elections in Vietnam. These elections
must be free, sincere, and supervised. The best
control would be exercised by the UN." 23/

The GVN insistence on sereiborial integrity and on elections only after

full control was pressed with great energy -- almost with vehemence --
up to the very last moment of the Geneva Conference.

e. GVN not Informed of French-DRV Agreements

The evidence suggests that it was not until sometime in early
July that the Bao Dai government learned of France's readiness to parti-
tion the country, given an acceptable demarcation line. According to a

B-11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
