Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

power, including the army and police. Diem will almost
certainly be President for many years. The regime will
continue to repress potential opposition elements and
depend increasingly upon the effectiveness of the Can Lao,
the regime's political apparatus, which is run by Diem's
brothers Nhu and Can....

"The capabilities of the GVN armed forces will improve
given continued US materiel support and training. Continu-
ance of the present level of training is threatened by a
recent finding of the International Control Commission (Icc)
that the US Temporary Equipment Recovery Mission (TERM) should
end its activities by mid-1959. In any event, GVN forces
will remain incapable of withstanding more than temporarily
the larger DRV forces. The internal security forces will not
be able to eradicate DRV supported guerrilla or subversive
activity in the foreseeable future. Army units will probably
have to be diverted to special internal security assignments....

"The GVN is preoccupied with the threat to national security
and the maintenance of large military and security forces. It
will probably remain unwilling to devote a significantly greater
share of resources and attention to longer range economic
development. Assuming continued US aid at about present levels,
modest improvement in South Vietnam's economic position is likely.
However, development will lag behind that in the North, and the
GVN will continue to rely heavily upon US support to close the
gap between its own resources and its reqduirements....

"There is little prospect of a significant improvement in
relations between South Vietnam and Cambodia so long as the
present leaders of the two countries remain in power. Relations
with Laos will probably remain generally friendly. Continued
suspicion that the French are intriguing in the area to recapture
@ position of major influence will probably prevent an improve-
ment of Franco-GVN relations....

"Despite widespread popular discontent, the Government of
the DRV is in full control of the country and no significant
internal threat to the regime is likely. With large-scale Bloc
aid, considerable progress has been made in rehabilitating and
developing the economy with major emphasis on agriculture, raw
materials and light industry. The regime will probably soon
have laid the foundations for considerable economic expansion....

"The DRV has no diplomatic relations with any country out-
side the Bloc and its foreign policy is subservient to the Bloc.
We believe that it will continue its harassment of the GVN and

of Laos, though a military invasion of either is unlikely...."

OT TOP SECRET - Sensitive
