Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

taken a strong stand against in the Stennis hearings had been hit,
and only 5 of the August list of 57 recommended targets (which had
meanwhile grown to 70 as new recommendations were made) remained
unstruck. Thus, except for the port of Haiphong and a few others,
virtually all of the economic and military targets in NVN that could
be considered even remotely significant had been hit. Except for
simply keeping it up, almost everything bombing could do to pressure
NVN had been done.

In early December Defense spokesmen announced that the
U.S. bombing in North and South Vietnam together had just topped the
total of 1,544,463 tons dropped by U.S. forces in the entire European
Theater during World War II. Of the 1,630,500 tons dropped, some
864,000 tons were dropped on NVN, already more than the 635,000 tons
dropped during the Korean War or the 503,000 tons dropped in the Pacific
Theater during World War II. h7/

4. ‘The Decibel Level Goes Up

The purely military problems of the war aside, the Presi-
dent was also experiencing great difficulty in maintaining public sup-
port for this conduct of the war in the fall of 1967.

With the apparent failure of the San Antonio formula to
start negotiations, the acrimony and shrillness of the public debate over
the war reached new levels. The "hawks" had had their day during the
Stennis hearings and the slow squeeze escalation that followed the failure
of the Paris contacts. Among the "doves" the new escalation was greeted
by new and more forceful outcries from the critics of the war. On October
12, the very day that Rusk was castigating the North Vietnamese in his
press conference for their stubbornness, thirty dovish Congressmen sent
the President an open letter complaining about the inconsistency of the
recent bombing targets and Secretary McNamara's testimony during the
Stennis hearings:

The bombing of targets close to the Chinese border, and
of the port cities of Cam Pha and Haiphong conflicts with
the carefully reasoned and factual analysis presented prior
+o those steps by Secretary of Defense Robert S. Mclamara on
August 25, 1967. We refer particularly to the Secretary's
‘contention that ‘our resort to a less selective campaign
of air atiack against the North would involve risks which
at present I regard as too high to accept for this dubious
prospect of successful risks.' 48/

On the basis of MeNemara's recommendations, the Congressmen urged the
President to stop the bombing and start negotiations.

ay - OP SECRET - Sensitive
