Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ewe

"$5.00 a-ante
Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Far astern Affairs
(Vineent) to the Under Scrvetary of State (Acheson)

[Wasntxetox,] December 25, 1946.

The serious implications of the fighting between the French and
the Vietnamese which teok place in the Tonkinese towns of Haiphong
and Langson during the week of November 20-27 were noted in a
memorandum to you of November 26.°° Tt was feared at that time

“Not printed. { :
that a showdown by force was in the making. This now appears to
have eventimafed. For the past six days, open war has been raging in
Tonkin and at several points in Annam, The Vietnamese Govern-
ment has fled Tlanoi and the Freach are endeavoring to clear the city
of remaining Vietnamese cuerillas with planes and tanks. Vietnamese
casualties drring the past month are probably now well over 2,000.
Although French easualties have been far lighter, Sainteny (Comis-
sioner for Tonkin and northern Annam) was himself seriously
wounded four days ago.

You may wish to make the following points when you see Ambas-
sador Bonnei this afternoon:

1. We are ceenly concerned by the outbreak of war in Tonkin and
Annam and by the annerent severance of most of the contacts between
the French and the Vietnomese and are fully aware of the unhappy
position in which the French have been placed;

2, Weare eratified hy the news that M. Moutet (Minister for Over-
seas France) is nroceeding immediately by air to Indochina to obtain
first-hand information on the situation:

3. We are aavare that such vnsettled conditions as now prevail in
northern Indechina offer provecation to outside interference and are

disturbed lest:

a. The conflict be brought up before the Security Council az a threat
to peace;

b. Other powers attemnt seme form of intervention, in which con-
nection tt may he noted that the Chinese press has renorterd that the
dispatch of Chinese troops fo the srea is heing considered owing to
the heavy losses sustained by the local Chinese in the November

fichting;
For wour faformiation:
Altheugh the French in Indochina have made far-reaching paper-
lesire for autonomy, Freneh actions

. .

concessions to the Vietnamese ¢
on the scene hive been directed toward whittling dawn the powers and
the territorial extent of the Vietnam “free state”. This process the
Vietnamese have coutinved to resist. At the same time. the French
themeclves admit that they lack the military streneth to reconquer
the country, In brief. with inadeqrate ferees, with public opinion
sharply at odds, with a. government rendered largely ineffective
throvel internal division, the French have tried ta accomplish in
Indechina whet a strene and united Britain has found it unwise to
Given the present elements in the simuatian,

sua

attemnt in Burma.
evetilla warfare may continue indefinitely.

CONFIDENTIAL .

yo
§
7
