Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Te Two General Alternative Directions of Policy

Thus as winter drew to an end in February-March 1964, it was
recognized, as it had never been fully recognized before, that the
situation in Vietnam was deteriorating so rapidly that the dimensions
and kinds of effort so far invested could not hope to reverse the
trend. This was indeed a turning point. The proposals for neutrali-
zation that had been loosely suggested in late fall and early winter
having been rejected, the issue to be resolved was what kinds of new
efforts, and what new dimensions of U.S. effort, would be decided
upon. One direction of effort which might have been chosen had, as
its most articulate advocate, the Assistant Secretary of State for Far
Fastern Affairs, Roger Hilsman. This was the policy line that, for
better or for worse, was largely rejected. Mainly because of this
policy disagreement, Mr. Hilsman left his post at almost the time it
became evident that his views were conclusively overruled. At the
time of his departure he wrote two memos to the Secretary of State
(dated 1) March 1964); one on the Southeast Asia problem generally,
one on South Vietnam. The latter of the two affords not only a good
summary of his views on the subject, but also a statement of the
policy alternatives that were, in significant measure, rejected.

(The rejection was of course by no means total. It was a matter of
degree and a question of where emphasis should lie among some programs
that were not in dispute generically. But the matter of degree and
emphasis was in dispute, and it was sufficient not only to induce
Hilsman to resign but to alter drastically the course of U.S. involve-
ment.) Hilsman wrote:

In my judgment, the strategic concept that
was developed for South Vietnam remains basically
sound. If we can ever manage to have it implemented
with vigor, the result will be victory.

The concept is based on the assumption that
villages in Southeast Asia are turned inward on
themselves and have little or no sense of identi-
fication with either the national government or
Communist ideology - that the villagers are isola-
ted physically, politically, and psychologically.
In such circumstances it is not difficult to
develop a guerrilla movement...

A corollary...is that the villagers' greatest
desire is security and that if the villagers are
given security, some simple progress towards a
better life, and --most important of all --a sense
that the government cares about them and their
future, they will respond with loyalty...

On the basis of.../this/ asswuption, the

*

35
