Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

V

THE COUP AND ITS AFTERMATH - NOVEMBER 1 ~ 23

1. The Coup

The atmosphere of Byzantine intrigue in Saigon in the fall of 1963
made it virtually impossible to keep track of all the plots against the
regime. In one of his last messages to Washington before the coup,
lodge identified ten individual dissident groups in addition to the
generals’ group. 1/ These various plots were highly fluid in composi-
tion and quixotic in character, quickly appearing, diseppearing and/or
merging with other groups. There were, however, two groups that came
into existence in the summer and retained their identity with some
mutetion until near the end. ‘The first, chronologically, was variously
identified as the Tuyen or Thao group after its successive leaders. It
Was conceived sometime in June by Dr. Tran Kim Tuyen, the Director of
Political Studies (national intelligence) under Diem, and involved ele-
ments of the Ministries of Civic Action and Information and certain ele-
ments of the Army. When Dr. Tuyen was sent out of the country in
September, the group was more or less merged with a separate group of
middle level officers headed by Lt Colonel Phamh Goc Thao. Several
dates were established by this group for a coup during the summer and
fall, but each time critical nilitary units were temporarily trensferred
by either the palace or the JGS, under General Don, each of whom was
somewhat aware of the group's plans and was interested in frustrating
them. In the end, it concerted efforts with the generals as the only
alternative with prospects of success.

The second group was, Of course, composed of the senior generals
of the Vietnamese Army. Plotting by this group also began in earnest
in June. Initially, its leader was identified as General Khiem and later
General Don, but the de facto leader throughout was, no doubt, General
“Minh who commanded by fer the greatest respect and allegiance within the
officer corps. The four principal members of the group were Generals
Minh, Don, Khiem, and Kim, all of whom were stationed in Saigon without
troop command, the latter three at JGS and General Minh as a palace
military advisor. Generals Tri and Khanh, I and II Corps commanders
respectively, were secondary members of the generals' group, but were
also in touch with the Thao group. The abortive attempt by the generals
to launch a coup in August has already been described in detail. Impor-
tant lessons seem to have been learned by these men from that experience,
for when they again began to set their plans and make arrangements it
was with great attention to detail and with an explicit division of labor.

fmong the plotters, General Minh had the overall direction of the

coup activities, although the group acted in committee fashion with the
members apparently voting at several. points on particular actions. He

be TOP SECRET - Sensitive
