Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

According to summary notes taken of the meeting, 7 State
and Defense were at considerable variance on what should be done in
either of two contingencies: first, French abandonment of the struggle;
second, a French demand for substantial U.S. forces (ground, sea, and
air). The State view considered the French position so critical already
as (in the rapporteur's words) to "force the U.S. to decide now to utilize
U.S. forces in the fighting in Southeast Asia." The Defense representa-
tive refused to underwrite U.S. involvement. He reportedly stated that
the French could win by the spring of 1955 given U.S. aid and given.
"improved French political relations with the Vietnamese... The commit-
ment of U.S. forces in a ‘civil war' in Indochina will be an admission
of the bankruptcy of our political policies re Southeast Asia and France
and should be resorted to only in extremity." He urged that every step
be taken to avoid a direct American commitment.

The Council meeting reached two important conclusions, both
fully in keeping with the Defense position. First, it decided that a
discussion of contingencies for U.S. involvement missed the essential
point that the French were capable of winning provided they gained native
political and military cooperation. Second, NSC 177 was, as Defense
suggested, inadequate in that the study failed to come to grips with the
fact that eventual success in Indochina depended upon French ability to
solve the problem of how to obtain Vietnamese support for the war effort.

ec. The JCS View

The NSC meeting of January 8 still left open the question
of U.S. action in the event troops were indisputably necessary to prevent
the "loss" of Indochina. In this regard, the Joint Chiefs of Staff kept
their options open. The Chiefs thought that the Navarre Plan was funda-
mentally sound, but was being steadily undercut by the gulf separating
the French from the Vietnamese, by General Nevarre's failure to implement
U.S. recommendations, and by hesitancy in Paris over the necessary
political concessions to the Bao Dai government. Yet JCS refused either
to rule out the use of U.S. combat forces or to back unequivocally their
employment. 8/

d. Formation of Special Working Group on Indochina

Dissatisfaction with NSC 177 and the NSC's subsequent
failure in NSC 5405 9/ to resolve the ground force commitment issue led
to the formation of a working group to evaluate the French military
effort, to make recommendations concerning future U.S. contributions to
it, and to devote attention to the various contingencies under which the
U.S. might be called upon to intervene directly in the war. The working
group, under the chairmanship of General G. B. Erskine (USMC, Ret. ), was
composed of representatives from the Departments of State and Defense,
the Joint Chiefs, and CIA. The group was responsible to NSC through
General W. Bedell Smith, Under Secretary of State, who had been appointed
by the Council to head the Special Committee on the U.S. and Indochina.

B-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

