Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

convincing Hanoi to lay off SVN. Both the DRV and the Chicoms would
face severe logistical difficulties in trying to maintain strong forces
in the field in SEA, difficulties which we share but by no means to the
same degree. There is no case for fearing a mass onslaught of Com-
munist manpower into SVN and its neighboring states, particularly if
our airpower is allowed a free hand against logistical targets.
Finally, the starvation conditions in China should discourage Communist
leaders there from being militarily venturesome for some time to come.

By the foregoing line of reasoning, I have reached the conclusion that
the introduction of a U.S. military Task Force without delay offers
definitely more advantage than it creates risks and difficulties. In
fact, I do not believe that our program to save SVN will succeed
without it. If the concept is approved, the exact size and composition.
of the force should be determined by the Secretary of Defense in con-
sultation with the JCS, the Chief MAAG, and CINCPAC. My own feeling is
that the initial size should not exceed about 8000, of which a pre-
ponderant number would be in logistical-type mits. After acquiring
experience in operating in SVN, this initial force will require re-
organization and adjustment. to the local scene.

As CINCPAC will point out, any torces committed to SVN will need to be
replaced by additional forces to his area from the strategic reserve

in the U.S. Also, any troops to SVN are in addition +o those which

may be required to execute SEATO Plan 5 in Laos. Both facts should be
taken into account in current considerations of the FY 1963 budget which
bear upon the permanent increase which should be made in the U.S.
military establishment to maintain our strategic position for the long
pull. 20/

These cables, it will be noticed, are rather sharply focused on the
insurgency as a problem reducible to fairly conventional military technique
and tactics. Together with the cables from Saigon, the impression is given
that the major needs are getting the Army to take the offensive, building
up @ much better intelligence setup, and persuading Diem to loosen up Admin-
istrative impediments to effective use of his forces.

V. THE TAYLOR REPORT

A report of the Taylor Mission was published November 3, in the form of
a black loose-leaf notebook containing a letter of transmittal of more than
routine significance, a 25-page "Evaluation and Conclusions,” then a series
of memoranda by members of the mission. Of these, the most important, of
course, were the Taylor cables, which, being “Eyes only for the President,"
were deleted from all but one or a very few copies of the report. There is
no separate paper from Rostow, and his views presumably are reflected in the
unsigned summary paper. ‘

100 -
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
