Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

unity in Europe...This development deserves our full support.
I am confident the United States will, by appropriate means,
extend to the free nations the support which the situation
requires...” Vv

c. ERP and NATO, 1948~-19h9

On 1 April, 1948, the Soviets initiated the blockade of Berlin.
In late April, the President called a conference of his senior advisers
to consider the Soviet threat, as well as the possibility of communist
fomented uprisings in France and Italy. John Foster Dulles, then State
Department consultant, later reported that the conferees agreed that:

",..Only a decisive pronouncement by the United States
would check the fear that was inspired by Moscow. ../and that
‘the U.S. should/ proceed along the lines of a North Atlantic
regional pact..."

Dulles also stated that Senator Vandenberg:

",..Felt that the Senate liked the idea of regional associa-
tions and would be disposed to approve in principle a further
developing of such associations for collective defense." 8/

In May, 1948, Senator Vandenberg introduced a resolution adopted by the
Senate on June 11, 1948, by a vote of 64 to 4, advising the Executive to
undertake the:

",..Progressive development of regional and other collec-
tive arrangements for individual and collective self-defense
in accordance with the purposes, principles, and provisions of —
the Charter [of the UN/, association of the United States, by
constitutional process, with such regional and other collective
arrangements as are based on continuous and effective self-help
and mutual aid, and as affect its national security."

The Department of State later explained to Congress that "the contents of
this resolution...became our guide in the discussion and subsequent nego-
tiations which led to the North Atlantic Pact." 10/

In June, 1948, Congress also passed the Economic Cooperation
Act, establishing the Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA) to adminis-
ter a program of foreign aid. The following month, armed with the Economic
Cooperation Act and the Vandenberg Resolution, the U.S. opened exploratory
talks on an alliance with the Brussels Pact members and Canada. Subse-
quently, the talks were broadened to include twelve nations. On April h,
1949, the North Atlantic Treaty was signed, and in late July ratified by
the Senate. It entered into force August 24, 1949.

Ka "TOP SECRET - Sensitive
