Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SHCRET - Sensitive

commercial imports. Lodge also felt that the regime was being more care~
ful about repressive actions. Furthermore, experienced observers felt
the U.S. policy was creating favorable conditions for a coup, although
Lodge did not see anyone seriously considering it. The day after this
message was sent, Lodge and his wife were invited by Diem to spend the
next Sunday (the day after the National Day celebration) with him at his
villa in Dalat, after visiting an agricultural station and a strategic
hamlet. Lodge promptly accepted. Diem had made the first move.

Washington instructed Lodge to use the occasion of the trip with
Diem to test for movement by the GV! on any of the U.S. demands. 21/
Lodge was to take edvantage of any subject of interest that Diem brought
up to determine both the willingness of the government to make conces--
sions and the effect of our selective sanctions. If Diem did not provide
such conversational opportunities, Lodge waS to assume the initiative.
In particular, he was to inquire about changes in the military campaign
that had been recommended by the McNamera-Taylor mission and subsequently
pressed by General Harkins; he was to suggest that Diem be cooperative
to the UN investigatory team that hed arrived in the country on October 2h,
and allow them full access to information and people; and he was to inquire
whether Diem did not think it time to end the bitter anti-American cam-
paign of the Times of Vietnam and the Nhus.

Lodge's Sunday with Diem on October 27, the day after the National
Day celebration, was frustrating in almost all respects. Diem did bring
up several issues of interest, but gave no indication that he had changed
his position or his attitude about the Buddhists or the U.S. 22/ He did
inquire about the suspension of the commercial import program to which
Lodge inquired in reply about the release of Buddhists and students from
jail, the reopening of the schools, and the elimination of anti-Buddhist
discrimination, Diem offered excuses and complaints as usual. Taking
the initiative, Lodge complained to Diem of the public opinion pressure
that his policies were placing the President under in the U.S. He com-
plained about the physical attacks on U.S. newsmen and about Mme Ihu's
inflammatory remarks in the U.S. as exemples of the kind of thing Diem
could prevent that would enhance his public image in the U.S, and the
world. Lodge describes the end of the conversation in this manner:

When it was evident that the conversation was practically
over, I said: "Mr. President, every single specific suggestion
which I have made, you have rejected. Isn't there some one
thing you may think of that is within your capabilities to do
and that would favorably impress U.S. opinion?” As on other
previous occasions when I asked him similar questions, he gave
me a blank look and changed the subject. 23/

While Lodge saw no movement on the basis of the conversation, he nonethe~
less suggested that consideration be given in Washington to what we would

ho TOP SECRET - Sensitive
