Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

2. That the combined effect of the total military effort
against NVN -- including the U.S. air strikes in NVN and
Taos, and the land, sea, and air operations in SVN -- will
ultimately cause the DRV to perceive that its probable losses
accruing from the war have become greater than its possible
gains and, on the basis of this net evaluation, the regime
will stop its support of the war in the South.

These two sets of interrelationships are assumed in
military planning, but it is not clear that they are sys-
tematically addressed in current intelligence estimates and
assessments. Instead, the tendency is to encapsulate the
bombing of NVN as one set of operations and the war in the
South as another set of operations, and to evaluate each
separately; and to tabulate and describe data on the physical,
economic, and military effects of the bombing, but not to
address specifically the relationship between such effects and
the data relating to the ability and will of the DRV to continue
its support of the war in the South.

The fragmented nature of current analyses and the lack of
an adeguate methodology for assessing the net effects of a
given set of military operations leaves a major gap between the
quantifiable data on bomb damage effects, on the one hand, and
policy judgments about the feasibility of achieving a given set
of objectives, on the other. Bridging this gap still requires
the exercise of broad political-military judgments that cannot
be supported or rejected on the basis of systematic intelli-
gence indicators. It must be concluded, therefore, that there
is currently no adequate basis for predicting the levels of
U.S. military effort that would be required to achieve the
stated objectives -- indeed, there is no firm basis for deter-
mining if there is any feasible level of effort that would
achieve these objectives. 4y/

The critical impact of this study on the Secretary's thinking is revealed
by the fact that many of its conclusions and much of its analysis would
find its way into McNamara's October trip report to the President.

Having submitted a stinging condemnation of the bombing,
the Study Group was under some obligation to offer constructive alter-
natives and this they did, siezing, not surprisingly, on the very idea
McNamara had suggested -- the anti-infiltration barrier. The product
of their summer's work was a reasonably detailed proposal for a multi-
system barrier across the DMZ and the Laotian panhandle that would make
extensive use of recently innovated mines and sensors. The central
portion of their recommendation follows:

155 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
