Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

passive, formal role the U.S. was to play at the Conference, Dulles
told the Under Secretary (1) that if a settlement should be. reached

he was to issue a unilateral (or, if possible, multilateral) statement
that "conforms substantially" to the seven points; (2) that "The United
States will not, however, become cosignatory with the Communists in
any Declaration” 3 (3) that the U.S. should not be put in a position
where it could be held responsible for guaranteeing the results of the
Conference; (4) that Smith's efforts should be directed toward for-
warding ideas to the "active negotiators" (France, Cambodia, Laos, and
Vietnam); and (5) that the U.S. should avoid permitting the French to
believe that a breakdown of the negotiations was due to U.S. advice or
pressure, thus making the U.S. in some way morally obligated to inter-
vene militarily in Indochina. Dulles stated with respect to this last
point that the U.S, was "not prepared at the present time to give any
commitment that it will intervene in the war if the Geneva Conference
fails. . .." 26/ This decision, of course, remained unknown to the
communists at Geneva, who continued to speculate on U.S, intentions.

h. Smith's Presence Reinforces Western Position

Coming soon after the Dulles-Bidault talks in Paris (13-14
July), Smith's return was apparently interpreted by the Chinese, and
doubtless by the Russians as well, as a sign of a united Western front
at the Conference. e7/ When taken in conjunction with what Mendés-
France had already publicly told the National Assembly of his intentions
to ask for conscripts in the event his 20 July deadline passed without
a settlement, and with what the Premier told Malenkov about not intending
Geneva to ea into a Panmunjom,' ' 28/ the return of Smith gave the
French negotiating position the appearance of real strength. The com-
munist delegations, therefore, were presented with an option. They
could call France's bluff -- by refusing further concessions or by
making a settlement contingent on a U.5S.- guarantee 29/ -- or they could
seek to gain French agreement that, hopefully, would obviate a U.S.-U.K.-
French alignment in Asia. As the Conference ground on toward Mendés-
France's 20 July deadline, major concessions from the communist side
brought the settlement essentially in line with the seven points.

A-42 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
