Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"From 1957 to 1960 the cadres who had remained in the
South had almost all been arrested. Only one or two cadres
were left in every three to five villages. What was amazing
was how these one or two cadres started the movement so well.

"The explanation is not that these cadres were exceptionally
gifted but the people they talked to were ready for rebellion.
The people were like a mound of straw, ready to be ignited....

"If at that time the government in the South had been a
good one, if it had not been dictatorial, if the agrarian reforms
had worked, if it had established control at the village level,
then launching the movement would have been difficult."

These interviews underscored three points on which the GVN
was apparently in error. First, with respect to the stay-behinds themselves,
by no means were all dedicated communists in the doctrinaire sense. Many
reported that they resented and feared the communists in the Viet Minh, and
apparently might have been willing to serve the GVN faithfully had it not
hounded them out of the society. There were several among the group, for
example, who had entered Saigon, and there founda degree of freedom which
kept them off the Viet Cong roles for years. Second, with regard to the
peasants in general, the Viet Minh were widely admired throughout the
South as national heroes, and the GVN therefore committed a tactical error
of the first magnitude in damning all Viet Minh without qualification as
communists. Third, the GVN created by its rural policy a climate of moral
indignation which energized the peasants politically, turned them against
the government, sustained the Viet Cong, and permitted "communists™ to
outlast severe GVN repressions and even to recruit during it.

The foregoing precis of the 1967 study presents views which
are paralleled in a captured Viet Cong history, written around 1963, which
describes the years after 1954 as follows:

EXPERIENCES OF THE SOUTH VIETNAM REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT DURING
THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS 127/

"During the past nine years, under the enlightened leadership
of the Party Central Committee, the people and the Party of South
Vietnam have experienced many phases along the difficult and com-
plicated path of struggle but they have also gained many victories
and experiences while pushing the South Vietnam liberation revolution
and creating the conditions for peaceful reunification of the
country...«.

"After the armistice, the South Vietnam people reverted to polit-
ical struggle through peaceful means by demanding personal rights,
freedom and negotiations concerning general elections in accordance
with the stipulations of the Geneva-Agreement so that the country
could be peacefully reunified. The Party apparatus in South Vietnam
Also became covert. The organization and methods of operation of the

51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
