Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

yod,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

But there was no disagreement with McGarr's fairly optimistic assessment of
the military situation and no sense of crisis.

Through unofficial channels, though, the White House was receiving a
far bleaker view of the situation. Schelsinger reports:

'The situation gets worse almost week by week,' Theodore H. White
wrote us in August. '...The guerrillas now control amost all the
southern delta - so much so that I could find no American who would
drive me outside Saigon in his car even by day without military con-
voy.' He reported a 'political breakdown of formidable proportions:
»eowhat perplexes hell out of me is that the Commies, on their side,
seem to be able to find people willing to die for their cause...I
find it discouraging to spend a night in a Saigon night-club full of
young fellows of 20 and 25 dancing and jitterbugging (they are called
‘la jeunesse cowboy') while twenty miles away their Communist contem-
poraries are terrozing the countryside.' An old China hand, White
was reminded of Chungking in the Second World War, complete with
Madame Nhu in the role of Madame Chiang Kai-shek. ‘If a defeat in
South Vietnam is to be considered our defeat, if we are responsible
for holding that area, then we must have authority to act. And that
means intervention in Vietnam politics...If we do decide so to inter-
vene, have we the proper personnel, the proper instruments, the proper
clarity of objectives to intervene successfully?" 18/

It did not take long to confirm White's pessimism, although this must
have made the dilemma of what to do about it seem all the more acute. In
September, the number of VC attacks jumped to nearly triple the level (about
450 vs. 150) that had prevailed for some months previously. The most spec-
tacular attack, which seems to have had a shattering effect in Saigon, was
the seizure of Phuoc Thanh, a provincial capital only 55 miles from Saigon.
The insurgents held the town a good part of the day, publicly beheaded
Diem's province chief, and departed before government troops arrived. The
official reporting to Washington by the end of the month pictured the situa-
tion as stagnating, if not dangerously deteriorating, although there con-
tinued to be no sense of the imminent crisis that Theodore White foresaw.

Here is an end-of-month report that Nolting sent just prior to the
meeting at which Diem asked for the treaty:

Status report on political items as of Sept 28:

General: Governmental and civil situation at end of month much
same as at beginning. While neither of these gave open signs of
deterioration, Diem government did not significantly improve its
political position among people or substantially further national
unity. On positive side several fifty-man district level recon-
struction teams were sent to each of 4 provinces, and there was

72. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
