Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

days after commencing movement with three divisions,

three infantry regiments, and eight infantry battalions.

He can reinforce his attack or defense with one infantry
division from Binh Dinh Province in II CTZ and one infan-
try regiment from Kontum Province in II CTZ in twelve days
after commencing movement. Many of these units are presently
understrength.

(2) In II CTZ, he can reinforce his attack or
defense in Northern II CTZ within ten days by elements
of one infantry division from Southern I CTZ and in
Southern II CTZ within five to ten days after commending
movement by up to two regiments from III CTZ.

(3) In III CTZ, he can reinforce his attack or
defense in the Northern portion with three separate
battalions from II CTZ and with one regiment from IV CTZ
within three to ten days after commencing movement.

(4) Preponderance of militia and local forces
in IV Corps and the reliance uwpon encroachment through
local and harassing action makes large unit reinforcement
unlikely in IV CTZ...." 15/

COMUSMACV continued by divining the enemy's overall strategy:

",.-eThe conclusion to be drawn from the enemy's
strength increase of some 42,000 during 1966 is that
despite known losses, he has been able to maintain a pro-
portional counter buildup to the growth of US/FWMA forces.
Sources of this increase are in-country conscription and
foot infiltration down the trails from NVN through the
DMZ, but principally through Laos and the Cambodian exten-
sion. To understand what the enemy is doing and is likely
to do in the coming year, it is essential to understand
his objectives, strategy, and major tactics, all of which
derive from the principles of insurgency warfare (or
"Wars of National Liberation") which essentially are
political in nature and which have been described by
Mao Tse Tung, Vo Nguyen Giap, and others such as Chi
Guevara with clarity and conviction. To aid in conveying
this picture I have summarized in the succeeding sub-
paragraphs my estimate of his overall strategy and its
probable continued application.

"A. Objectives: The enemy's objectives in
SVN may be expressed under two dual headings: to
extend his control over the population of SVN and to

*

of TOP SECRET - Sensitive
