oA, 2

NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

OUTGOING TELEGRAM

Sent to: Amembassy PARIS PRIOKITY 5655 vay 155 2993
ey aat pm

' You will reeall that at the final meeting with Mayer
at White House on March 28, President made certain general
comments regarding Letourneau plan for brin=3, hostilities
in Indochina to successful conclusion. In reply Mayer in
name of French GOVT said that he would welcome our sending
US military officers to Indochina in order to pursue evalua-
tion of vlan, and President expressed willingness to ct. ;
arrange it. Defense has now completed its study of material
furnished by Letourneau and Allard and wishes to take ad-
vantage of Mayer's suggestion to send high level military
mission to Indochina in order to study situation with
General Navarre and explore ways and means through which
American assistance can best be fitted into workable plans
for aggressive pursuit of hostilities under present cir-
cumstances. -A principal objective of mission will be to
ascertain what military plans and capabilities PAREN
manpower, equipment and particularly air force END PAREN
will be required so that there will be firm prospect of re-
versing current military trend by beginning of next
fighting season, i.e., OCT 1953. Proposed agenda will
of course be submitted in due course.

Please inform Mayer of the above as soon as possible
requesting him to indicate (a) his continued readiness to
have ,such a mission visit Indochina and (b) approximate
date at which mission could proceed to Indochina.

Department understands General Navarre arrives Saigon
about May 19; he will obviously wish to become familiar
with the details of the situation before receiving proposed
American mission, We have in mind for the arrival of. the
latter a date such as June 10. The mission, would probably
stay in Indochina for not more than a month. It will
probably include a State Department representative in an

eee aoe

lcopy held in S/S-R.

TOP SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

KO
