Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

ar

"Tn Southeast Asia we have treaty commitments that obligate us to
take action to meet the common danger if there is an aggression by means
of armed attack. That aggression is under way.

"If these questiogns can be decided by people in free elections,
perhaps we could all relax. I don't know anyone who through free elec-
tions, any great nation--we have a particular State in India--that
brought Communists to power with free elections. They are not mono-
lithie--they are not monolithic. ;

"But all branches of the Communist Party that I know of are com-
mitted to what they call the world revolution. And their picture of
that world revolution is quite contrary to the kind of world organiza-
tion sketched out in the Charter of the United Nations.

"Now, they have important differences among themselves about how
you best get on with that world revolution. And there is a contest within
the Communist world between those who think that peaceful coexistence and
peaceful competition is the better way to do it and the militants, pri-
marily in Peking, who believe that you back this world revolution by force.

"But I think the Communist commitment to world revolution is pretty
general throughout the Communist movement.

"Now, if they want to compete peacefully, all right, let's do that.
But when they start moving by force to impose this upon other people by
force, then you have a very serious question about where it leads and
how you organize a world peace on that basis."

ae ae

"Mr. Niven: But some of our former diplomats and some of the critics
are forever contending that the Viet-Nam war places strings upon our.
alliances, it complicates and exacerbates other problems.

"Secretary Rusk: I think that is nonsense--because if you want to
put some strain on our other alliances, just let it become apparent
that our commitment under an alliance is not worth very much. Then you
will see some strain on our alliances. r

"Mr. Niven: You are suggesting if we don't uphold this commitment
other people will lose faith in our commitments all over the world.

"Secretary Rusk: And more importantly, our adversaries or prospec-
tive adversaries may make some gross miscalculations about what we would
do with respect to those commitments."

See

D-110 ©
