Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

/é se
TOP SECRET - Sensitive

It is true that the majority of "hard core" captives and defectors
cited in the RAND reports no longer predict an inevitable VC
victory, many of this selected group now see the war as a stale-

. mate with each side building up its respective force. Although
some of this group now see defeat, in the main the confidence of
the individual enemy soldier in a military victory has dwindled
due, in large measure, to the string of defeats he has suffered
at the hands of the uS/GVN/Tree World Forces. However, limita-
tion of these US/GVN forces for economic reasons would curtail the
momentum of the military effort at this critical point and con-
ceivably jeopardize the overall US effort in Vietnam.

4. Para 10 & 11, Part C, Ref A discusses troop utilization
but does not depict clearly the military concept of operations in
Vietnam for CY 67. Our concept recognizes and is built around
two equally important, continuing and complementary requirements
which call for the same type of military resources and flexibility
in their application. On the one hand, we must maintain the
security of our bases and key population and food producing centers
and assist in expanding security of areas under Government control.
On the other hand we must seek out and destroy the enemy's main
forces and his bases to create the environment in which meaningful
Revolutionary Development can proceed. The priority of US/FW
military efforts will continue to be devoted to our main mission,
the destruction of enemy main forces and bases. The "entirely
new kind of work" referred to by the Ambassador is in reality a
continuation of our surveillance and rapid reaction tactics vis-
a-vis enemy forces occupying sanctvaries in adjacent territory. We
are according heightened emphasis to this effort, and may find it
necessary to ask for additional forces to insure its success.

Information copies of this message were sent to the Secretary of State,
Secretary of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Also on 5 October, Dr. Alain Enthoyen, Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Systems Analysis, in a memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, 45/
compared Lodge's proposed 42 billion piaster budget with several other
relevant figures. The first figure was 41 billion piasters, which would
allow Program 3 deployments based wpoon actual July and August piaster
spending rates, but which did not allow for any price increases during
CY 67. The next figure given was 44 billion piasters which allowed
for completion of Program 3 deployments and for pricés to rise during
the period July 1966 to December 1967 by 7%- ‘The third figure given was
43.6 billion piasters which would allow a rise in U.S. strength to a total
of 525,000 by December of 1967, but did hot allow room for inflation. The
last figure given was 47.4 billion piasters, which would allow completion
of CINCPAC's deployment plan which envisioned an end '68 strength of
569,000, but which did not allow for any increase in prices. Assistant

7é TOP SECRET - Sensitive
