Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

launching too-venturesome, costly enterprises without proper prepara-
tion. Even top leaders were not immune to criticism on that score;
e.g-, Le Duan was apparently relieved of command over COSVN in late
1952 or 1953 for pressing too fast and hard. 181/ From the highest
strategic level to the lowest tactical level, Vietnamese communist
doctrine underscores the essentiality of careful preparatory work,
and the criticality of timing initial overt operations. 182/ It is
not likely, then, that a decision to proceed toward the reunification
of Vietnam by force was lightly taken by the Lao Dong leaders; it
would in any event have countenanced extensive, painstaking, covert
groundwork.

Such preliminary efforts might have been the refurbishing
of the Communist Party in South Vietnam, which had been seriously
weakened by Diem's persistent Communist Denunciation Campaign. It seems
probable that, whenever they were started, the initial steps of the
DRV were directed to reinvigorating the Iao Dong apparatus in the
South. For this purpose it would have needed relatively few cadre --
for instance, with 400 men, the lao Dong could have dispatched 10
organizers to each of South Vietnam's provinces. From all indications,
organizers were sent South in 1958; the numbers are not known. Similarly,
in all likelihood the DRV would have looked to base preparations. Again
evidence is scanty, but there were definite indications that guerrilla
secure-areas were being prepared in the Highlands, in the Plain of
Reeds, and in the War Zone C - War Zone D region north of Saigon. 183/

There are also indications, however, that debate over
strategy continued through 1958. Reports captured while being for-
warded via Lao Dong channels from South Vietnam to Hanoi indicate that
some subordinates there clung to the belief that the Diem regime could
be toppled without recourse to guerrilla warfare, and that others
despaired of success without substantial military aid from the North.
There is also evidence throughout 1958 +hat Viet Cong tactics were
being subjected to careful study in Hanoi. 184/

Whatever preparations were in progress during 1958, in
December, 1958, or January, 1959, Hanoi apparently decided that the
time had come to intensify its efforts. On December 1, there was an
incident at a "political re-education camp" north of Saigon ~- the
"Phu Loi Massacre" -- which the DRV promptly seized upon to launch
a worldwide propaganda offensive against Diem. U.S. intelligence came
into possession of a directive from Hanoi to its subordinate head~
quarters in Inter-Sector V during December, 1958, which stated that
the Iao Dong Party Central Committee had decided to "open a new stage
of the struggle" 185/; the following month, January, 1959, U.S. sources
also acquired an order directing a Viet Cong build-up in Tay Ninh
province to provide a base for guerrilla operations; the same order
mentioned similar bases in the mountains of western Inter-Sector V. 186/

55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
