Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The White House was assigned a paper on the prospects and possibilities
in the pacification program. State was to prepare a paper on U.S. 7
settlement terms and conditions, and the CIA was to produce its usual
estimate of the current situation.

With respect to the air war, the CIA had already to some
extent anticipated the alternatives in a limited distribution memo in
mid-April. 64/ Their judgment was that Hanoi was taking a harder line
since the publication of the Johnson-Ho letters in March and would continue
the armed struggle vigorously in the next phase waiting for a better
negotiating opportunity. Three bombing programs were considered by the
CIA. The first was an intensified program against military, industrial
and LOC targets. Their estimate was that while such a course would create
serious problems for the DRV the minimum essential flow of supplies into
the North and on to the South would continue. No great change in Chinese
or Soviet policies was anticipated from such a course of action. By
adding the mining of the ports to this intensified air campaign, Hanoi's
ability to support the war would be directly threatened. This would
confront the Soviet Union with difficult choices, although the CIA expected
that in the end the Soviets would avoid a direct confrontation with the
U.S. and would simply step up their support through China. Mining of the
ports would put China in "...a commanding political position, since it
would have control over the only remaining supply lines to North Viet-
nam." 65/ If the mining were construed by Hanoi and/or Peking as the
prelude to an invasion of the North, Chinese combat troops could be
expected to move into North Vietnam to safeguard China's strategic
southern frontier. As to the Hanoi leadership, the CIA analysis did
not foresee their capitulating on their goals in the South even in the
face of the closing of their ports. A third possibility, attacking the
airfields, was expected to produce no major Soviet response and at most
only the transfer of some North Vietnamese fighters to Chinese bases and
the possible entry of Chinese planes into the air war.

With a full-scale debate of future strategy in the offing,
Robert Komer decided to leave behind his own views on the best course for
U.S. policy before he went to Saigon to become head of CORDS. Questioning
whether stepped up bombing or more troops were likely to produce the
desired results, Komer identified what he felt were the "Critical Vari-
ables Which Will Determine Success in Vietnam." 66/ He outlined them as
follows:

A. Tt is Unlikely that Hanoi will Negotiate. We

can't count on a negotiated compromise. Perhaps the NLF
would prove more flexible, but it seems increasingly
under the thumb of Hanoi.

B. More Bombing or Mining Would Raise the Pain Level
but Probably Wouldn't Force Hanoi to Cry Uncle. I'm no

eetigieiareaenase ae Ee I ne ee ee Tee eae ea TRE eT -
expert on this, but can't see it as decisive. Could it

ee TOP SECRET - Sensitive
