8.

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

/ .
The principal obstacles to the execution of United States-

policy in pursuit of its objectives in the Far East are as follows:

a. The policy and action of the Soviet Union.

(1) The Soviet Communists have historically considered
Asia as one of their principal objectives; Bolshevik ideol-
ogy devotes a prominent place to the capture of the "colo-
nial and semi-colonial" areas of the world, by which is
meant principally Asia. Soviet policy in Asia has been
aided by the fact that communists have heen. successful to
a large degree in subverting indigenous nationalist move~
ments; the capture of these movements has been a goal of
Kremlin policy.

(2) The Kremlin has not yet resorted to the large-
scale and open employment of Soviet armed forces, although
the aggression by both North Koreans and Chinese Communists
indicates that the Kremlin is willing to undertake greater
risks than in the past.

(3) The Kremlin, besides supplying and directing lead-
ership of communist parties in Asia, and building centers
of subversion, infiltration, and revolution, is providing
military assistance to communist forces in Asia, both in
materiel and in technical personnel.

(4) The fact that the Soviet threat is world-wide in
character has prevented the concentration of free world ef-
fort against the various forms of communist aggression in
Asia. The combination of political, military, technical
and propaganda support given by the Soviet Government to
the communist assault in Asia confronts the United States
and its principal allies with a major challenge which
vitally affects world power positions.

b. The policy and action of Communist China.

(1) Communist China is already involved in a major mil-
itary aggression in Korea, is publicly committed to an at-
tempt to seize Formosa, may attack Hong Kong, and may in-
erease its support to Ho Chih Minh to include the use of
Chinese forces in Indochina. Communist success in these
efforts would expose the remainder of Southeast Asia to
attack and would sharply increase the threat to Japan and
the remainder of the off-shore island chain, Such pros-
pects lend greater effectiveness to the ordinary communist
techniques of penetration and subversion and cause many
Asians to remain on the side lines during the present
phase of the struggle.

bb
: TOP SECRET
