Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
[lo8.- a a ara rs

10. Immediately prior to the release of the "Jordan report"
and the exchange of letters between Diem and the President,
special diplomatic approaches also to be made to Canada, as well
as Burma, Indonesia, Cambodia, Ceylon, the UAR, and Yugoslavia.
SEATO, NATO, and OAS members should be informed through those
organizations, with selected members also informed individually. |
The possibility of some special approach to Poland as a member of
the ICC should also be considered.

When we reach this memorandum in the record, the decision seems essen-
tially sealed. Kennedy, by every indication in the press at the time and
according to the recollections of all the memoirs, was, at the least, very
reluctant to send American ground forces to Vietnam, and quite possibly
every bit as "strongly opposed” as the leaked news stories depicted him.

He now had a joint recommendation from his Secretary of State and Secretary
of Defense telling him just what he surely wanted to hear; that a decision
on combat forces could be deferred. Consequently, Kennedy's decision on
this point can hardly be considered in doubt beyond November 11, although

a formal NSC meeting on the question was not held until the 15th. On the
question of demands on Diem, again there is no reason to suspect the issue
was in doubt any later, at most, than the llth. The only questions which
are in doubt are the extent to which the Rusk/McNamara memorandum simply
happened to come to the President in such convenient form, or whether the
President arranged it so; and if so, how far this formal paper differed
from the real recommendations of the President's senior advisors. The
record available gives no basis for even guessing about this. As noted
earlier, even McNamara, who is on record wita a previous, quite different
memorandum, cannot be flatly said to have changed his mind (or been
overruled). There is too much room for uncertainty about what he was
really up to when he signed the memorandum.

In any event, Kennedy essentially adopted the Rusk /MeNamara set of
recommendations, although the record is not entirely clear on when he
did so. There was an NSC meeting November 5; but although at least the
Chairmen of the JCS was there, the record shoys that even after this
meeting there was some uncertainty (or perhaps reluctance) in the JCS
about whether the decision had been made. The record shows that McNamara
phoned General Lemnitzer to assure him that this was the case. But the
cables transmitting the decision to Saigon were dated November 14, the
day before the NSC meeting. The formal decision paper (NSAM 111) was not
signed until November 22nd. As noted earlier, the NSAM is essentially
the recommendations section of the Rusk/McNamara paper, but with the
initial recommendation (committing the U.S. to save Vietnam) deleted. 18/

The NSAM wes headed "First Phase of Vietnam Program," which, of course,
implied that a further decision to send combat troops was in prospect.

133

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
