Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and to RD workers. ‘An ATD man cannot do his job,‘ he said,
‘while being shot at by the VC.'

"Mohr responded just as heatedly, that security could
not come first -- because security from guerrillas is mean-
ingless and impossible until the peasant population is moti-
vated to support the GVN and deprive the guerrillas of havens,
secrecy, and resources.

"Obviously, the easy answer to this circular chicken-egg
debate is to say that both are necessary -- military protection
and public motivation against the VC. And yet even that answer
is incomplete for it defines security only in the American
frame of reference...

"I know of no one who believes we have begun effectively
to achieve the goal of gaining the population's active support,
despite a series of pacification programs and despite even the
budding early efforts of Ambassador Porter's new program.

"The Military Aspect. Secretary McNamara, Mr. Komer, Am-
bassadors Johnson, Lodge, and Porter, Mr. Gaud, I, and all others
who have approached the problem are perfectly agreed that the
military aspect of RD has been spindly and weak." 45/

ao Oo ae ae BH oe

"This probably is the result of the entirely understandable
preoccupation by MACV in recent months with the main force
military emergency. However justifiable this has been, a major
effect has nonetheless been our failure effectively to press
RVNAF to even start meeting their crucial RD responsibilities.

"(I know of no one who believes that these should be met
principally by American forces -- unless we should wish the
whole RD effort to collapse once we leave.)

"The Civil Aspect. Similarly, the work of civilian agen-
cies has fallen short -- largely, but not only because of the
failure of RVNAF to provide a military screen behind which to
work...

"Rather than engage in a civil-military debate, I think we
should devote our efforts toward trying to devise an adminis-
trative structure that capitalizes on the assets each agency
can offer to RD.

"What should be the elements of an ideal organization?

"1. It should have maximum leverage on RVNAF to engage in
clear and hold operations in direct support of RDM efforts.

95 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
