108.

109.

Til.

ii?2.

113.

Tph,

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
Page

Asiatic neighbors consider Bao Dai a French puppet, The U.S,
should realize that ECA and military aid from the U. §,

do not constitute decisive factors in Indochina's prob-

jens. Therefore the Griffin Mission should not commit

ECA or military aid to French Indochina unless France

"sives requisite public undertakings re further steps

leading to status similar to Indonesia." Stanton

(Bangkok) 160 to Acheson, 17 February 1950..cccecsescseesees 280

The Stete Department submits to the NSC a report on "The

Position of the United States with Respect to Indochine,"

which analyzes the problem to determine measures to protect

U.S. Security in Indochine and prevent communist expansion

in the area. NSC No. Gh, 27 February 1990 ..ccccscsceseccess 202

President Truman approves the desiensation of Mr. Robert A.
Griffin as Chief of the Economic Strvey Mission to Southeast
Asia, with rank of Minister. Five basic objectives of the
Mission are outlined; (1) determine needed projects of

political significance; (2) prepare for Point 4 programs;

(3) advise local officials of methods and extent of partici-
pation in Point 4; (4) brief U.S. representatives; and

(5) investigate regional aspects of technical assistance.
Department of State letter to Griffin, 1 March 1950......... 286

The State Department maintains to the Department of Defense

that Indochina is subject to immediate danger and is the

"nost strategically important area of Southeast Asia.”

Dean Rusk believes that the resources of the U. &. should

be deployed to "reserve Indochina from further Communist
encroachment." Dean Rusk, Deputy Undersecretary of State

to General James H. Burns, Defense Representative to South-

east Asia Aid Committee, 7 March 1950... ...cecsssceccsevesees 208

Acheson instructs Saigon, in light of anticipated Franco-

Viet friction on handling U.&. aid, that function of Griffin
Mission is "clearly understood to be fact finding.” Acheson

$56 th: Gsizon, O Merch: HOSO... . ace wemeeceereenencaneemanninge 200

Griffin replies that "7 understand that ours is an economic
aid mission” and that the budding controversy could jeopar-
dize the economic aid program. The French show no enthusi-
asm for Point 4. Gullion (Saigon) 176 to Acheson, 13 March
nS jo) 0 Perera Ce eee ee ee ee Se a 290

Griffin submits his mission's preliminery conclusions on
Indochina with «e listing of specific urgent programs total-
ing $23.5 million exclusive of military aid and indirect

uv

Pe TOP SECRET - Sensitive
