Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was also responsible for the military operation of the coup itself.
General Don was the liaison with the Americans and responsible for
wooing General Dinh. General Kim handled plenning for the post-coup
government and the reletions with the civilian groups that were ex~-
pected to be called on to support the coup. 2/ General Khiem was to
play a eritical role at the end of October as the liaison man with tne
Thao coup group in working ovt the details of their support and inte-
gration into the actual execution of the coup.

As already noted, the fundamental problem of the plotters was their
lack of troop comnand in the immediate Saigon area. The Ngo femily's
longstanding fear of military coups, as previously discussed, had been
the main factor in all military command assignments and promotion policy.
Nowhere was loyalty a more important prerequisite for command than in’
Saigon, the surrounding III Corps, and the nearby IV Corps, with its
headquarters only 40 miles away down Highway 4. In addition to the
sizable special forces units in Saigon under Colonel Tung and the various
national police and paramilitary wnits that also took their orders directly
from the palace, Diem had appointed the vain, ambitious, and supposedly
loyal General Dinh as Commander of III Corps (whose 5th Division was
stationed at nearby Bien Hoa) and the Saigon Military District. Further-
more, the IVY Corps was commanded by General Cao, who had saved Diem
during the 1960 coup by bringing his loyal 7th Division troops up from
My Tho. It was on this formidable line-up of forces that the family had
staked its survival; and not without reason, as the frustrated coup of
August demonstrated.

Saigon, however, was not entirely without dissident elements. With
the exception of their commanders, the Marine battalion, the airborne
battalion, and the Air Force were all sympathetic to a coup. But the
plotters knew that a favorable balance of forces could not be achieved
or maintained without either the conversion or neutralization of Generals
Dinh and Ceo.

During the August pagoda raids, Dinh had been given overall command
of the crackdown, although Tung hed taken his instructions as always
directly from Nhu in carrying out the attacks. 3/ Thereafter, Dinh,
who was a notorious braggart, boasted that he had saved the country from
the Buddhists, Communists, and "foreign adventurers.” Carried away with
himself, he held a news conference on August 27 in which he was harried
and finelly humiliated by artagonistie American journalists. The plotting
generals decided that they would play on his vanity and egoism to win him
over to their side. With his pride injured at the hands of the newsmen,
Dinh was easy prey to Don's suggestion that Nhu had played him for a fool,
but that he really was a national hero, and that the regime was indebted
to him. Don suggested thet Dinh go to Diem with a plan to increase mili-
tary participation in the government, specifically that he, Dinh, be
named Minister of Interior. Don rightly expected that Diem would be
outraged at such a brazen request, and would reprimand Dinh, further

53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
