Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

/O# .
é TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of secondary importance. Neither option was likely to bring about a
change in NVN policy, either toward negotiations or toward sharply
enlarging the war, but either option would substantially increase NVN's
economic difficulties in the North and logistics problems in the South.

First, the estimate said, NVN would have to resort to
much less efficient methods of receiving, storing and handling POL:

Destruction of the storage tanks and bulk unloading
equipment at Haiphong would substantially increase the ~
Communists' logistic problems and force them to improvise
alternate POL import and distribution channels. These
could include, subject to the hazards of interdiction, the
use of rail or highway tankers and the transport of POL
in drums by road, rail, or coastal shipping. The DRV is
already increasing its use of drums because this facili-
tates dispersal and concealment. However, handling POL
this way also requires greater expenditures of time and
effort, and very large numbers of drums. Resort to these
methods would necessitate transhipping through Chinese ports
or transport directly across China by rail, which would in
turn not only involve physical delays and difficulties but
also increase the DRV's political problems in arranging for the
the passage of Soviet supplies through China. 23/

This in turn would interfere with the production and distribution of
goods in NVN:

The economy would suffer appreciably from the resultant
disruption of transportation. This...would somewhat curtail
the output of the DRV's modest industrial establishment and
complicate the problems of internal distribution. 2h/

And make it more difficult to support the war in the South (although it
would not force a reduction in such support):

The loss of stored POL and the dislocation of the
distribution system would add appreciably to the DRV's
difficulties in supplying the Communist forces in the South.
However, we have estimated that the Communist effort in
South Vietnam, at present levels of combat, does not depend
on imports of POL into the South and requires only relatively
small tonnages of other supplies (say 12 tons per day, on an

; annual basis). Accordingly, we believe that adequate quan-
tities of supplies would continue to move by one means or
another to the Communist forces in South Vietnam, though the
supplies would not move as fast and it would, hence require
more to keep the pipeline filled.... 25/

Fal ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
