by &

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"an effective means of depriving the enemy of imports
required to continue the war. If used in conjunction
with RT air strikes against the port system, Haiphong
can be virtually sealed as a source of war supplies." 47/

This CINCPAC bombing request message was followed on 6 February
comprehensive PRACTICE NINE cable, which reviewed the "barrier

plan" and discussed the previous MACV-CINCPAC planning. 48/ In it
CINCPAC reemphasized that unless the additional troops CCMUSMACYV had
requested were forthcoming the target date to reach the required levels
of effectiveness could not be met.

He summarized the operational and logistical considerations by

saying:

Then

"The COMUSMACV plan responds to the requirement for
submission of en anti-infiltration plan in the north-

‘eastern area of Quang Tri Province, south of the DMZ.

"Within the constraints imposed, the concept is
feasible. The system of obstacles and strong points,
with forces assigned, would be capable of impeding
infiltration to a degree, and detecting any overt
invasion threat.

"The additive forces requested are essential to
implementation of this plan. Furthermore, the diversion
of in-country forces which would be required to support
the plan would have an adverse impact on other necessary
programs." 9/

the message took a surprising turn:

"The level of infiltration in the area the obstacle
system is to be installed does not justify diversion of
the effort required to construct and man such @ system.
Moreover, there is no indication that present operations
are inadequate to cope with what has been an insignificant
infiltration problem in this particular area of SVN.

“Extension and expansion of the system of obstacles
westward from Dong Ha mountain to the Laotian border to
provide an effective anti-infiltration system is contin-
gent upon additional forces, i.e., an infantry division
and an armored cavalry regiment.

"A rigid operational capability date of 1 November 67
should not obtain.” 50/

1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
3
