Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Army had the requisite organization, cadres, discipline, and
sense of purpose. The intellectuals would never be able

to adopt a common point of view unless it was imposed by a
dictatorship -- by a party as the Communists did, or a ‘family
dictatorship’ such as Diem's. This situation was made worse
because of disproportion between measure of political and
civil liberties granted in wartine situation on one hand

and Jack of background and sense of responsibility of re-
ciplents on faeet other...He was aware he had perhaps given
more freedom than really prudent handling of situation would
have dictated, but he had to be mindful oft-proclaimed demo-
cratic goals of the Vietnamese revolution. Ail in all, this
disunity would not be fatal because Army itself was united,
and no potentially disruptive force could hope to oppose
Army and overthrow GVN. (N.B. No reference to religious
problems, sects, or lsbor under this heading.)

"2. Need for Action Outside South Vietnam.

"., Khanh dwelt at length on this, laying out some
fairly precise ideas about the kind of action that might
be taken. ;

"Basically, he said that despite the pacification
plan and some individual successes he and his government
were ‘on the defensive’ against the Viet Cong. He said
pretty flatly that they could not win unless action was
taken outside South Vietnam, and that this needed a firm
U.S. decision for such action.

"...He [Knexh] then said that the ‘inmediate' re-
sponse should be to clean out the Communists in Fastern Iaos,
who were the same kind of threat to him, and that we should
not get bogged down in negotiations but act.

",..Secretary then noted we could never predict
enemy reaction with certainty. How would SVN people react
if NVN and China responded by attacking SVN? Khanh replied
this would have even more favorable effect on SVN national
unity and faith in victory, and would mobilize usual patri-
otic reactions in face of more clearcut external threat.

"3. Timing of Action Against the North and Necessary
Prior Action Within South Vietnam.

"Khanh asked if Secretary and Ambassador believed
he should proclaim state of war existed during next few days
and now that Generals’ case was settled. Both advised him
to wait at least until after Honolulu Conference and in
no case ever to take ection on such matter without consult-
ing. He agreed, and remarked that if he proclaimed state

, 23° TOP SECRET - Sensitive
