Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
JOP SaCkil = Senstbive

After the meeting, the stetement was recast in the form of
Presidential instructions to Ambassador Taylor -- with specific authori-
zation for the Ambassador to alter the phrasing as he thought necessary
to insure effective communications with the GVN. However, the concept
and the specific points for communication were unchanged. The instruc-
tions made specific provision for him to inform senior GYN officials of
the U.S. willingness (1) to cooperate in intensifying the GV! maritime
operations and (2) "to ada U.S. airpower as needed to restrict the use
of laotian territory as an infiltration route into Sy." These pledges
were prefaced by statements to the effect that U.S. actions directly
against the DRV could not be taken until GVN effectiveness was assured
along certain specified lines. ‘he statements made explicit the policy
view that "we should not incur the risks which are inherent in such an
expansion of hostilities" until such improvements were made. As evidence
of our desire to encourage these developments, however, the rationale
stressed that the Administration was "willing to strike harder at the
infiltration routes in Laos and at sea." 159/

The instructions also included specific provision that the U.S.
Mission in Saigon was to work with the GVN in developing joint plans for
reprisal operations and for air operations appropriate for a second
phase of new U.S, actions. The general relationship between the two
contemplated phases was explained, and the Phase Two purpose "of con-
vinecing the leaders of DRY that it is to their interest to cease to aid
the Viet Cong" was stated, The joint character of the "progressively
mounting” air operations against North Vietnam, should they be decided

on later, was emphasized. 160/

As indicated earlier, there was no NSAM issued following the
strategy meeting of 1 December. The reasons why are clear. In effect,
the actions recomnended by the Principals and approved by the President
did not constitute a significant departure from the actions authorized
in NSAM 314 (9 September 1964). That document had already provided for
discussions with the Laotian government leading to possible U.S. armed
reconnaissance operations along the infiltration routes. Further, it
had provided for resumption of the 34A maritime operations, which had
corbtinued throughout the fall. In.effect, the December strategy meeting
produced little change except to make more concrete the concept of possible
future operations against North Vietnam and to authorize steps to include
the GVN in preparations for these possibilities.

It is clear thet the President did not make any commitment at
this point to expand the war through future operations against lorth
Vietnem. The aSsurances intended for the GVIi in this regard were con-
ditional at best. The extent to which the President was committed to
such @ course in his mind, or in discussions with his leading advisors,
was not made explicit in the sources available. It is implied, however,
in brief notes which were apparently intended to summarize the mood of
the meeting on 1 December. In what may have been a summation of the
President's expressions, these notes indicate several themes: (1) it is
necessary to weigh the risks of careful action versus the risks of loss

57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
