Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

industrial democratic states in Europe and weak and undemocratic states
in Asia.' The answer is that, for the Secretary of State, our treaty.
commitments are a part of the supreme law of the land, and I do not
believe that we can be honorable in Europe and dishonorable in Asia.

"T do believe that the United States must keep its pledged word.
That is not only a matter of national honor but an essential to the
preservation of peace. For the backbone of ee peace is the integrity
of the commitment of the United States."

oe

"The fact is that I have always treated the SEATO treaty--which
the Senate approved with only one dissenting vote--as an important part
of our commitment to defend South Viet- Nem." .

ae oe

"T do not regard our policy in Viet-Nam as based only on past
commitments. I believe that it is now just as much in our interest--
and that of the free world--to repel Communist aggression there as it
was when we made those earlier commitments."

i i

49. Article by Leonard Unger, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for

The United States and the Far Rast:

Far Eastern Affairs : Problems
and Policies"; Department of State Bulletin, March 21, 1966, p. 452.
ce A

"Our national interest--I speak as an American--is no longer expli-
eitly guided in the Far East, by particular economic or military concerns
with individual areas, as was indeed to a considerable extent the case
not only with ourselves but also with the British and others before
World War II. We have a deep concern for expanded trade and cultural
ties--which alone can in the end bind the world together--and we have
military base rights and needs related to our role in assisting in the
security in the area. But neither of these is an end in itself. The
first will, we believe, flourish if the nations in the area are able
to develop in freedom; the second, the security role, must now be main-
tained but will over time, we hope, become susceptible of reduction and
indeed, wherever possible, of elimination."

* + %*

" ...in the fall of 508 President Kennedy made the decision that
the United States would have to go beyond the limits of the Geneva
accords. That decision was a fully justified response to the wholesale

D-76
