Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

foxx
TOP SECREI - Sensitive

Self-Defense Corps, relieving the regular Army of static missions,
raising the level of the mobility of Army Forces by the provision of
considerably more helicopters and light aviation, and organizing

a Border Ranger Force for a long-term campaign on the Laotian

border against the Viet-Cong infiltrators. The U.S. Government
will support this effort with equipment and with military units and
personnel to do those tasks which the Armed Forces of Vietnam cannot
perform in time. Such tasks include air reconnaissance and photo-
graphy, airlift (beyond the present capacity of SVN forces), special
intelligence, and air-ground support techniques.

(5) The U.S. Government will assist the GVN in effecting
Surveillance and control over the coastal waters and inland water-
ways, furnishing such advisors, operating personnel and small craft
as may be necessary for guick and effective operations.

(6) The MAAG, Vietnam, will be reorganized and increased
in size as may be necessary by the implementation of these recom-
mendations.

(7) The U.S. Government will offer to introduce into
South Vietnam a military Task Force to operate under U.S. control
for the following purposes:

(a) Provide a U.S. military presence capable of
raising national morale and of showing to Southeast Asia the serious-
ness of the U.S. intent to resist a Communist take-over.

(b) Conduct logistical operations in support of mili-
tary and flood relief operations.

(c) Conduct such combat operations as are necessary
for self-defense and for the security of the area in which they are
stationed.

(a) Provide an emergency reserve to back up the
Armed Forces of the GVN in the case of a heightened military crisis.

(e) Act as an advance party of such additional forces
as may be introduced if CINCPAC or SEATO contingency plans are
invoked.

(8) The U.S. Government will review its economic aid
program to take into account the needs of flood relief and to give
priority to those projects in support of the expanded counter-
insurgency program. 19/

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
