Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the year to 385,000 men and to attacks on the key military
targets outside heavily populated areas in all of North
Vietnam except the strip near China.

(2) Alternative B. Forces increased in modest
amounts by the end of the year to about 300,000 (with
the possibility of halting even the deployments implicit
in that figure in case of signal failure by the GVN to
perform) and air attacks in the northeast quadrant of
North Vietnam kept to present levels in terms of intensity
and type of target. 125/

The third consideration was a continuation of U.S. support for GVN revo-
lutionary development and inflation control.

Two alternative GVN tactics for establishing contact with
the NLF were offered. The first alternative would be an overt, highly
publicized GVN appeal to the vc/NLF to meet with representatives of the
GVN to work out arrangements for peace. Alternative two foresaw the
initiation of the first contacts through covert channels with public
negotiations to follow if the covert talks revealed a basis for agreement.
All of this would produce, the paper argued, one of the following out-
comes:

(a) If things were going passably for our side but
the VC/NLF showed no readiness to settle on terms providing
reasonable assurances for the continuation of a non-Communist
regime in SVN, we might agree to plod on with present programs
(with or without intensified military activity) until the vc/
NLF showed more give.

(b) If things were going badly for our side we might
feel obliged to insist on the GVN's coming to the best
terms it could get with the VC/NLF, with our continuing mili-
tary and other support conditioned on the GVN moving along
those lines.

(c) If things were going well for our side, the VC/NLF
might accede to terms which entailed no serious risks for
a continuing non-Communist orientation of the GVN in the
short term. It would probably have to be assumed that this
would represent no more than a tactical retreat of the vc/NLF. 126/

3. Exogeneous Factors
No precise reason can be adduced for the termination of

this interdepartmental effort to refine options for American action. In
a general way, as the preceding paper shows, the effort had lost some

108 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
