Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

PLE Re ts ea nin H
We ay} "al
+

Sf Greet Lists iu daly

things, a "common customs system, common currency, and common policy of
immigration” is necessary. (This latter was added because of the prob-
lems posed by the proximity of China.) These states, M. Bollaert con-
tinued, will also plan together the reconstruction of Indo China in
which “of course, we (the French) have our own point of view".

"This collaboration is, after-all, unavoidable and all those con-
cerned (the French Republic being one of, them) will have to decide
together how, under the supervision of the High Commissioner,........

«+s.-also be "commissioners of the republic” to defend “French

eg AD

economic and cultured interests”.

"The High Commissioner, or his delegate (whose functions or position
is not specified), will take good care that our countrymen ere enabled
to enjoy all the democratic freedom enjoyed by the citizens of the states
belonging to the Union and will see to it that our concerns do not fare
worse than local ones; the citizens and concerns of Indochina being, in
return, certain of finding the same advantages in France. The High Com-
missioner or his delegate will therefore insist on ascertaining that the
personal end material status of French subjects is never one-sidedly
changed."

And finally, M. Bollaert said, the High Commissioner will have a
special status drawn up for the “southern and northern minorities of
Indo China whose rights are considered by the French as having a sacred
character."

All the Indochinese states will be, M. Bollaert said, in the French
Union which “must frame in the autonomy of the Indo Chinese people...it
does not restrain private immunities...the French Union is resilient and
dynamic enough to allow @ nation to develop freely in framework...it is
an aggregate of forces, ever on the move, each through a never ceasing
interplay of exchange, giving and teking at one and the same time...it is
in the French Union that men will find their raison d*etre".

But, he edded, the French Union can have only one army end one diplo-
macy. “The police forces of the associated states of Indo China will
assure in time of peace internal order on their own territory; in case
of foreign aggression, they will be integrated in the armed forces of the
French Union for the defense of their countries and of the Union,"

M, Bolleert also promised that the French "would not take reprisals
and that all political and militaly prisoners would be liberated recipro-
cally. He made « thrust at the “originators of the December 19th ageres-
sion" who have lost "much of their credit with the French people". He
extolled the French Union and its accomplishment and possibilities at
some length and concluded:

