Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Admiral d'Argenlieu, Moutet believed that there could be no negotia-
tions with Ho Chi Minh. He wrote of the "cruel disillusionment of
agreements that could not be put into effect...," and he declared that:

"We can no longer speak of a free agreement between
France and Vietnam....

"Before any negotiations today, it is necessary to have
a military decision. I am sorry, but one cannot commit such
madness as the Vietnamese have done with impunity." 47/

It was the politician's ideas, rather than the general's, which
prevailed in Paris. Premier Ramadier -- himself a Socialist -- spoke
of peace in Vietnam, and announced that his government favored inde-
pendence and unity for Vietnam:

"Independence within the French Union /and/ union of the
three Annamese countries, if the Annamese people desire it." 48/

At the same time, however, his government permitted Admiral d'Argenlieu
to launch a military campaign of major proportions and punitive intent.

Very early in the war, the French raised the spectre of Communist
conspiracy in Vietnam. Admiral d'Argenlieu in Saigon called for an
internationally concerted policy to array the Western powers against
the expansion of communism in Asia, beginning with Vietnam. In the
National Assembly debated in March, 1947, a Rightist deputy introduced
the charge that the violence in Vietnam had been directed from Moscow:

"Nationalism in Indochina is a means, the end is Soviet
imperialism." h9/

Neither the government nor the people of France heeded General Leclere's
statement of January, 1947: r

_ "ASnti-communism will be a useless tool as long as the
problem of nationalism remains unsolved." 50/

Ho Chi Minh, for his part, issued repeated appeals to France for
peace, even offering to withdraw personally:

"When France recognizes the independence and unity of Viet-
nam, we will retire to our village, for we are not ambitious
for power or honor." 51/

In February, 1947, the French offered terms to Ho tantamount to uncon-
ditional surrender. Ho flatly rejected these, asking the French repre-
sentative, "If you were in my place, would you accept them? ...In the

French Union there is no place for cowards. If I accepted these condi-
tions I should be one." 52/ On 1 March 1947, Ho appealed publicly to

A-34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
