63

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

This message went to Lodge as "EYES ONLY" for himself
and Ambassador Porter. To what extent its contents were shared with
General Westmoreland or other military or naval personnel, available
documents do not indicate. In any case, the Embassy in Saigon had
received from the very highest authority the same kind of intimation
that opponents of the pause had been given in Washington. If the
period of inaction would prepare American and world opinion for more
severe measures, it followed that the next stage would see such measures
put into effect.

As the pause continued beyond the deadline mentioned to
Lodge, military planners in Saigon, Honolulu, and Washington worked
at defining what these severe measures ought to be. On January 12,
Admiral Sharp sent the Joint Chiefs a long cable, summarizing the
conclusions of intensive planning by his staff-and that of COMUSMACV.

We began R/olling/ T/hunder/ with very limited
objectives, at a time when PAVN infiltration was of less
significance than it is now,

CINCPAC commented,

».--When RT began, there was considerable hope of
causing Hanoi to cease aggression through an increasing
pressure brought to bear through carefully timed destruc-
tion of selected resources, accompanied by threat of
greater losses...But...the nature of the war has changed
since the air campaign began. RT has not forced Hanoi
to the decision which we sought. There is now every indi-
eation that Ho Chi Minh intends to continue support of the
VC until he is denied the capability to do so....We must
do all that we can to make it as difficult and costly as
possible for Hanoi to continue direction and support of
aggression. In good conscience, we should not long delay
resumption of a RT program designed to meet the changed
nature of the war.

Specifically, Admiral Sharp recommended:

1. "....interdiction of land LOC's from China and closing
of the ports..../the/ northeast quadrant....must be
opened up for armed recce with authority to attack
Loc targets as necessary."

: 2, "Destruction of resources within NVN should begin
with POL. Every Known POL facility and distribution
activity should be destroyed and harassed until the
war is concluded. Denial of electric power facilities
should begin at an early date and continue until all

: ‘TOP SECRET - Sensitive
3
