Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

NATO Art. 4 & 5 SEATO Art. IV
any such armed attack and all mea- measures under this paragraph shall
sures taken as a result thereof be immediately reported to the
shall immediately be reported to Security Council of the United
the Security Council. Nations

Such measures shall be terminated

when the Security Council has

taken the measures necessary to

restore and maintain international
' peace and security.

It is understood that no action

on the territory of any state

designated by unanimous agreement

under paragraph 1 of this article
or on any territory so desig-
nated shall be taken except at the

i ; invitation or with the consent

|. .of the government concerned.

| As the American delegation at Manila noted, the SEATO Article IV was in
line with the wording used in the U.S., Philippine, Korean, and ANZUS pacts.
The issue of precommitment to react to armed attack was side-stepped:

“"Secretary Dulles pointed. out during the conference that the
wording of the North Atlantic Treaty, which speaks of an attack
on one as an attack on all, nevertheless provides that the Parties
will act in accordance with their constitutional processes. He
persuaded the Cenference that the final agreed wording of Arti-
cle IV would be better received by the Senate, should tend to
minimize debate, and would facilitate ratification by the United.
States." 30/

The SEATO Treaty wording is thus intentionally ambiguous on the point of
just what response would be made by the members in theevent of an armed.
attack. Such an attack against one of the SEATO members would be viewed.
as a "common danger" rather than as an "attack on all.” Where the NATO
Treaty notes that action taken "forthwith" might include the "use of armed.
force," the SEATO Treaty states merely that "common danger” would be "met"
in accordance with"constitutional processes." SEATO also makes the provision
that no action shall be taken on the territory of any threatened state with-
out the consent of that state, a qualification necessary to reassure small-
country members that their independence was not threatened by neocolonialism
or other domination, and recognition of one of the most significant differ-
ences in the environment of the two treaty organizations.

In some respects, nevertheless, Article IV of the SEATO Treaty
is broader than its NATO counterparts. The nature of the threat is loosely

A-18 ' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
