Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"I have two basic reasons for giving this responsibility
to General Westmoreland, In the first place, the indispensable -
first stage of pacification is providing continuous local
security, a function primarily of RVNAF, in which MACV performs
& supporting advisory role. In the seconi place, the greater
part of the U.S, Advisory and Logistic assets involved in
support of Revolutionary Development belong to MACV. If uni-
fied management of U.S. Mission assets in support of the
Vietnamese program is desirable, COMUSMACV is the logical
choice. :

"J have directed that a single chain of responsibility for
advice and support of the Vietnamese Revolutionary Development
program be instituted from Saigon down to district level. Just
as Mr. Komer will supervise the U.S, Advisory role at the Saigon
level as Deputy To General Westmoreland, so will the present OCO
regional directors serve as deputies to U.S. field force com-
manders.

"At the province level, a senior advisor will be desig-
nated, either civilian or military, following analysis of the
local situation.

"While management will thus be unified, the integrity of
the Office of Civil Operations will be preserved. It will con-
tinue to perform the same functions as before, and will continue
to have direct communication on technical matters with its field
-echelons. The present Revolutionary Development support division
of MACV will be integrated into OCO, and its chief will. serve as
deputy to the Director of OCO. Such a unified civil/military
U.S. advisory effort in the vital field of Revolutionary Develop-
ment is unprecedented. But so too is the situation which we
confront. RD is in my view neither civil nor military but a
unique merging of both to meet a unique wartime need. Thus my
resolution is to have U.S, civilian and military officials work
together as one team in order more effectively to support our
Vietnamese allies. Many further details will have to be worked
out, and various difficulties will doubtless be encountered,
but I am confident that this realignment of responsibilities is
a sound management step and I count on all U.S. officers and ;
officials concerned to make it work effectively in practice." 4/

Bunker outlined to Washington the line he proposed to take during a
question and answer period with the press:

"Besides the above announcement, I intend to stress the
following basic points in answer to press questions,or in
backgrounding: (a) I made this decision not because I think

129 .

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
