Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

courage ahd confidence into all the Vietnamese under arms who
are involved in pacification -- both military and police --
which is at stake.

"hk. As regards your instruction for a military deputy for
Porter, General Westmoreland proposes Major General Paul Smith,
who is acceptable to Porter. Porter believes General Smith should
be attached to civilian agency (State Department - Embassy Saigon)
while on this duty, along lines precedents already established.

He could wear civilian or military garb as circumstances require.

oe

"6. General Westmoreland does not wish to have a separate
deputy for Revolutionary Development, but has nominated Brigadier
General William Knowlton as Special Assistant for Pacification.

% & *

"8. Concerning paragraph 4(c). Mission directive will state
clearly that Deputy Ambassador Porter will be primarily occupied
with RD and thet other Mission business will be handled by appro-
priate sections of Mission. There are certain other aspects to
consider, however. Porter has assumed charge when I have been
absent. Any change in that respect could only derogate from his
position in eyes of American community and GVN. He believes, and
TI concur, that his assumption of charge cannot be "nominal’ with-
out risk of downgrading him in local eyes. Additionally, it is
essential that there be a point of decision in Mission, without
ambiguity. In practice, Porter intends to leave routine functions
of Mission (political, protocol, administrative, personnel, con-
sular, visitors, ete.) to sections normally handling them. He
expects, however, to remain closely cognizant of political de-
velopments and together with political counselor and CAS chief
to consult and decide course of action to take or recommend to
department as circumstances dictate. I believe this is reason-
able approach and have full confidence in his intention to con-
centrate on RD,

x % *

"10. Your paregranh 5. I have always believed that Revyolu-
tionary Development/Pacification must be carried out by Vietnamese
forces, who; as you say, must esteblish constructive relations
with the population. I have never advocaved U.S. forces taking
on ‘substantial’ share of this task. I do believe, however,
that an American presence in this field amounting to a very
small percentage of the total manpower involved could induce
ARVN ta take the proper attitude by ‘on the job’ training and.
‘could give the necessary courage and confidence to the Viet-
nemese. Lodge" 58/

LS
TOP SECRET - Sensitive
