Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

later, a leader of the November, 1963 coup "somewhat emphatically” told
an American agent that "it would do no good to send anyone around to
attempt to stop things, as happened in November, 1960.") 9/

The situation that was left -- with a number of American offi-
cials unhappy with Diem and doubtful that he was capable of winning the
war, yet unwilling to risk a coup -- produced strains within the
fmerican government. Short of encouraging a coup, we seemed to have two
alternatives: attempt to pressure Diem or attempt to so win his confi-
dence that he would accept our advice willingly. The only effective form
of U.S. pressure, however, was to withhold aid, and doing so would sooner
or later weaken the war effort.

Consequently a division developed, mainly (but not purely ) along
the lines of Defense against State, about the advisability of using pres-
sure. The division was particularly sharp since Diem seened willing to go
part way, at least, in meeting our military suggestions, so that the
Defense view tended to be that the U.S. would be weakening the war effort
if aid were withheld to seek to gain civil reforms that not many people in
Defense regarded as crucial. Besides, it was argued, Diem would not suc-
cumb to pressure anyway. We would just encourage another coup, and the
communists would exploit it,

Given this sort of argument, there would always (at least through
1961) be at least two layers to decisions about aid to Vietnam: What
should the U.S. be willing to give? and What, if any, demands should be
made on Diem in return for the. aid?

3. Problems With the Soviets

But from Washington, both problems within Vietnam -- how to deal
with the Viet Cong, and how to deal with Diem -- seemed quite inconsequen-
tial compared to the problems of dealing with the Soviets. There were two
elements to the Soviet problem. The first, which only indirectly affected
Vietnam, was the generally aggressive and confident posture of the Russians
at that time, and the generally defensive position of the Americans, To use
W.W. Rostow's terminology, the Soviets were then entering the third year of
their “post-sputnik" offensive, and their aggressiveness would continue
through the Cuban missile crisis. On the U.S. side there was dismay even
among Republicans (openly, for example, by Rockefeller; necessarily subdued
by Nixon, but reported by any number of journalists on the basis of private
conversations) at what seemed to be an erosion of the American position in
the world. The Coolidge Commission, appointed by the Ereei Gone, warned him
in January, 1960,‘to, among other steps, "close the missile gap" and gen-
erally strengthen our defenses, Kennedy, of course, made erosion of our
position in the world a major campaign issue. All of this made 1961 a
peculiarly difficult year for Americans to make concessions, or give ground
to the Soviets when it could be avoided, or even postponed, That was clear

5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
