Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

can no longer support any foreign domination or foreign administra-
tion.

"You could understand even better if you were able to see
what is happening here, if you were able to sense this desire
for independence which has been smoldering in the bottom of all
hearts, and which no human force can any longer hold back. Even
if you were to arrive to re-establish a French administration
here, it would no longer be obeyed; each village would be a nest
of resistance, every former friend an enemy, and your officials
and colonists themselves would ask to depart from this unbreathable
atmosphere.

"IT beg you to understand that the only way to safeguard French
interests and the spiritual influence of France in Indochina is
to recognize frankly the independence of Vietnam and to renounce
any idea of re-establishing French sovereignty or administration
here in whatever form it may be.

"You would be able to listen to us so easily and become our
friends if you would stop aspiring to become our masters again.

"Making this appeal to the well recognized idealism of the
French people and the great wisdom of their leader, we hope that
peace and the joy which has rung for all the people of the world
will be guaranteed equally to all people who live in Indochina,
‘native as well as foreign." 31/

De Gaulle never replied; the message was in any event moot, because within
a week Bao Dai formally ceded his powers to the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam, and thereafter France was faced in North Vietnam not by the
Francophile mandarin-king, but by Ho Chi Minh, the implacable professional
revolutionary -- dedicated nationalist-communist.

| (6) The Liberation of South Vietnam

The overturning of Japanese power in Cochinchina followed
a separate course. Bao Dai's government had waited until August 14, 1945

to proclaim the incorporation of Cochinchina into a united Vietnam, but

this move came much too late to have any impact. The first effective steps
toward consolidating the disunited Vietnamese political groups in the South
was undertaken by the Trotskyist "Struggle" faction and formerly collabora-
tionist parties, who merged on August 14, 1945, to form a "United National
Front" (Mat Tran Quoc Thong Nhut). Participants included the Cao Dai League,
the Hoa Hao Sect, and the Buddhist League. The United National Front adopted
the Trotskyist platform, and directed its energies principally against

Bao Dai's representatives in Saigon. The Viet Minh seems to have delayed
until 2 August to launch its program in Cochinchina, apparently moving

at that time in response to the seizure of power by the Viet Minh in Annam
and Tonkin. In the meantime, the ICP, led by Tran Van Giau, quietly seized

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

B-30
