Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

PART ONE

ADVISORY STABILITY, 1954-1960
A. ‘The U.S. Gamble With Limited Resources

ORTGINS OF THE U.S. INVOLVEMENT IN RVN

The U.S. decision to attempt, generally within the strictures imposed
by the Geneva Accords, to shore wp the Government of South Vietnam (GVN)
and to prevent the new nation's fall into communist hands appears in
retrospect to have been, in Wellington's phrase, “a close run thing."

The prevalent American attitude in 1954 was that the deployment of large
U.S. forces to the mainland of Asia should be permitted "never again."
Spending on national security was to be pegged at tolerable levels which
would not threaten the well-being of the domestic economy, yet communist
expansion was to be deterred by the threat of massive retaliation com-
bined with U.S. support for free nations capable of managing their own
internal order and insuring that any act of armed aggression would appear
as just thet -- the unambiguous precondition for nuclear retaliation.

INITIAL MILITARY RELUCTANCE

The policy solution to this problem in national security strategy
has been accurately and exhaustively described in recent literature. Buf
It need not be repeated here. The important thing to note is that the
attempt to achieve stability in RVN was recognized to be a marginal
gamble to retain a small but potentially important piece in the larger
jig saw puzzle which was U.S. national security policy. As such, it
seemed worth the risk of a moderate outlay of assistance and advice.
General J. Lawton Collins stated the case succinctly in his assessment
for the National Security Council:

-»- There is at least an even chance that Vietnam can be saved
from Communism if the present programs of its government are
fully implemented....I cannot guarantee that Vietnam will
remain free, even with our aid. But I know that without our
aid Vietnam will surely be lost to Communism. 2

The gamble consisted in making available to the GVN that material support
and advice which would enable it to assure its own viability. Much of
the military equipment was already in RVN, the residue of earlier efforts
to support the French war against the Viet Minh. ‘The framework for mili-
tary advice was present, too, in the form of MAAG Indochina which had
assisted (and attempted to influence -~ generally unsuccessfully) the
French struggle.

3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
