Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number; NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in the DaNang harbor with CIP cement, rice, fertilizer,
and miscellaneous commercial cargo... (C) Nine chartered
coastal vessels...operated for USAID...

With respect to military commodities, RVNAF maintains a
30-60 day supply of expendable combat items while their
rice stocks are maintained at a 30-day level. However,
under rationing these rice stocks can be extended to 60
days. The RVNAF items which are in short supply through-
out Vietnam, as well as in the Hue-Daliang area, include
vehicle batteries, brake shoes, and POL. We consider it
unwise to interfere with the flow of supplies to RVNAF at
this time since it would limit effectiveness of operations
against Viet Cong forces...

Indeed any U.S. effort to withhold resources which it con-
trols in this area may stimulate excesses by the struggle
movement even though an attempt is made to conceal the
U.S. role in the imposition of sanctions. 15/

3. Violence Explodes in May, 1966

After promising the elections by August 15, against Lodge's public
disagreement, Ky said in a public statement on May 4 that "we will try’
to hold elections by October." In Lodge's absence, on a long trip to
Washington, Porter protested privately to Ky that once he had made a
public commitment on election timing he was risking further disorders
to appear to shirk it. Nevertheless, Ky added to the flames by a
further public statement that he expected to remain in office for
another year. New disorders broke out, and Daliang and Hue again fell
under overt control of the Struggle Movement. Without consulting the
Embassy, the Directorate laid plans for several days and then on May 15
airlifted troops to Daliang and then to Hue. 16/ :

State first reaction showed unrestrained fury, and sanctioned
"yough talk" to stop the fighting:

This may require rough talk but U.S, cannot accept this
insane bickering...do your best in next few hours. In-
tolerable that Ky should...move...against Daliang without
consultation with us. Urgent now to insist that fighting
stop. 17/

State did not, at first, sanction the threat of force; for example, it said
Gen. Walt should continue to harbor the dissident General Dinh in III MAF
Headouarters, and that Walt should tell GY" he “can't foresee the U.S,
Government reaction" if GViv forces should break into his Headquarters.

Its overall guidance was to use persuasion, withdrawal of advisers, and

@ public posture of non-intervention, with the following specifics:

17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
