Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

MARINE COMBAT UNITS GO TO DA NANG -- MARCH 1965

SUMMARY

On March 8, 1965, two United States Marine Corps Battalion Landing
Teams arrived at Da Nang with the Mission to help secure the air base
* and associated installations. What was the rationale behind the decision
to put the first U.S. ground combat units into Vietnam? Was this a
conscious prelude to U.S. assumption of a ground combat role in the
Vietnam war?

On February 22, 1965, COMUSMACV, General Westmoreland, recommended
the landing and the mission. The United States at the time was already
conducting Fleming Dart airstrikes against the DRV. Since Da Nang was
supporting those strikes in addition to concomitant air activity within

MM, there was concern in many quarters that Da Nang might suffer the
same fate as had Bien Hoa the previous November. Ambassador Taylor
supported Westmoreland's request for the Marines, but with serious reser-
vations. He saw this deployment as the removal of the last barrier to
U.S. assumption of the ground war. In addition, he argued that two Marine
BLIs would not be able to guarantee base security and that "white-faced"
troops would be unable to assimilate and would have great difficulty
identifying the enemy. a/ There is no documentary evidence to indicate
that any of the other decision-making principals shered Ambassador Taylor's
reservations.

Approval to send the Marines, contingent on GVN concurrence, came
on February 26, 1965, and, except for an abortive attempt by the Defense
Department to substitute Army airborne troops for the Marines at the |
last minute, 211 progressed smoothly through the lending of the Marines
and the preparation of their defensive positions.

Estimates of the political/military situation in SVN in early 1965,
both from the official viewpoint and from other observers, were uni-
versally gloomy. Wo one foresaw ultimate US/GYN victory without reversal
of the then-current trend. The GVN was seen to be well on its way to
complete collapse. The most optimistic estimate was that the VC would
take over within a year. :

Prior to the request for Marines, the principal advisors to the
President had, for some time, been debating possible U.S. courses of
action in SVN. The possible use of ground forces for security and as
deterrent or reaction forces against possible DRV/CPR ground action in
SEA was included in these discussions, and indeed both CINCPAC and
COMUSMACV had prepared detailed contingency plans in expectation of a
decision to so employ ground forces. However, no plan to engage U.S.
ground forces in offensive action against the Viet Cong had been con-
sidered. From the documentary record, it appears that the U.S. offensive

i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
