=O
js>

Declassified per Executive Order 135 26, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The Gravel mines were small mines designed to damage the enemy's
feet and legs. These mines were to sterilize (become non-effective)
after a given period of time. The button bomblets were small mines
(aspirin size) designed to give a loud report but not to injure when
stepped on by a shod foot. Their purpose was to make a noise, indica-
ting pedestrian traffic, which could be picked up by the acoustic
sensors. The SADEYE was a bomblet cluster, dropped from aircraft, which
was exceedingly effective against personnel.

This was not the first barrier proposed against infiltration from
North Vietnam. Earlier in the year, in April, CINCPAC had replied to a
Suggestion to construct a conventional barrier, utilizing mines, and wire
with troops to monitor and back it up, which would run from the coast
across the northern portion of South Vietnam through the panhandle of
laos, to Thailand. CINCPAC and MACV had argued against this barrier
because of the tremendous strain it placed upon the logistical facilities
in both South Vietnam and Thailand, and because of the large number of
troops which it required. 32/ The CINCPAC reply to the Jason proposal
was sent to the JCS on 13 September 1966. Although CINCPAC conceded that
"any measure which will effectively impede, disrupt flow of men and materiel .
from North Vietnam into South Vietnam merits consideration." Their judgment
was that even "if we were to invest the time, effort end resources in a
barrier project, it is doubtful that it would improve US position in South
Vietnam." CINCPAC expressed doubt whether the barrier suggested would
impede infiltration. He contended that a barrier system mst be tended;
if not, it could be breached with ease, while the flow of men and materiel
to the VC/NVA continued, An aerial delivered obstacle would not be expected
to supplant the need for soldiers on the ground, and the time, effort and
resources of men and materiel required to establish a ground barrier would
be tremendous. Also, he expressed his misgivings over the reliability
and practicality of the electronic and other type gadgetry which would be
in the barrier.

However, General Westmoreland was interested in another anti-infiltration
device which was under development by the Army. This was a Caltrop -- a
non-explosive device designed to penetrate enemy footwear to inflict wounds.
On 2h September 1966, General Westmoreland had indicated that a 30-90 days
sterilization time for the Caltrop would be acceptable, 33/ and on
2 October, he recommended to CINCPAC and JCS that the Caltrop be deployed
for operational tests as soon as possible. 3h/

Unfortunately, all of these ideas for halting or slowing the infil-
tration through the DMZ were to become effective sometime in the future.
General Westmoreland's problem was very much in the present. On Septem-
ber 13, he sent Admiral Sharp a message on the threat to the I Corps
Tactical Zone. 35/ In this message, Westmoreland laid out what he con-
sidered to be the nature of the threat posed by the enemy sanctuaries;
in this case, the Demilitarized Zone and North Vietnam immediately above
the DMZ.

66 TOP SECRET. - Sensitive :

.
