Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

+eothis proposal might also require a close integration of
U.S. and Vietnamese pacification activities in Saigon....

Tit. ‘In addition to these radical proposals...we continue
gravely concerned about the differences between Khanh and the
generals, the problem of Big Minh, and the religious differences....

IV. Finally, we wish to consult with you on the manner in
which we can...eliminate the business as usual attitude in Saigon
eeee We will also wish to examine the best means of reducing the
problems of dependents.... 96/

On the same day that the foregoing policy guidance went out to Ambas-
sador lodge, a meeting was held in Washington at William Sullivan's sugges-
tion, Attended by Mr. McGeorge Bundy, John McNaughton, General Goodpastor
and William Colby, it considered a policy memo drawn up by Mr. Mendenhall
covering most of the same points raised in the message to Lodge. The gist of
. the memo was that the GVN was not operating effectively enough to reverse
the adverse trend of the war against the VC, that the Khanh government was
well intentioned but its good plans were not being translated into effec-
tive action, and that it was necessary therefore to find means of broadening
the U.S. role in Vietnam in order to infuse efficiency into the operations
of the GVN. In general, the memo argued the U.S. should become more deeply
involved both militarily and otherwise, abandoning the passive advisor role
but avoiding visibility as a part of the chain of command. Vietnamese
sensitivities imposed limitations, and if it should appear that the United
States intruded, the Vietnamese might come to resent our presence. The memo
proposed, nevertheless, that the meeting carefully consider a phased expan-
Sion of the U.S. role. First, military advisors might be placed in para-
military units in seven provinces == about 300 added advisors would be needed
for this purpose, Second, in the same seven provinces -- Long An, Dinh Tuong,
Kien Hoa, Tay Ninh, Hau Ngiah, Quany Ngia, and Phu Yen -- U.S. civilian and
military personnel should be interlarded in the civil administration, about
10 per province for a total of 70. Third, as an experiment, the U.S. might
try civilians at district levels to supplement the U.S. military personnel
being assigned there. "In view of the traditional distrust of the Vietnam-
ese peasants for military personnel, it is of considerable importance to
begin an introduction of American civilian presence at this level to help
win support of the peasant population." [Sic] To back up these field opera-
tions it was suggested that a joint Vietnamese-American Pacification Opera-
tions Committee be established, with high level representation from MACV and
USOM on the U.S. Side, and from the Defense Ministry, the Joint General
Staff (JGS), the Vice President for Pacification, and the Directorate of
the Budget and Foreign Aid on the Vietnamese side. This Joint Pacification ~
Operations Committee should be concerned not with policy but with implement-
ation of policies. (This was judged the weak side of the GVN.) U.S.
personnel might, in addition, be introduced at reasonably high levels into
the Ministries of Rural Affairs, Interior, Information, Education, Health,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

78
