Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and social scientific literature, that a direct, frontal
attack on.a society tends to strengthen the social fabric
of the nation, to increase popular support of the existing
government, to improve the determination of both the
leadership and the populace to fight back, to induce a
variety of protective measures that reduce the society's
vulnerability to future attack and to develop an increased
capacity for quick repairs and restoration of essential
functions. The great variety of physical and social
countermeasures that North Vietnam has taken in response
to the bombing is now well documented but the potential
effectiveness of these countermeasures has not been ade-
quately considered in previous planning or assessment
studies. 58/

The JASON study took a detailed look at alternative means
of applying our air power in-an effort to determine if some other combina-
tion of targets and tactics would achieve better results. Nine different
strategies were examined including mining the ports, attacking the dikes
and various combinations of attack emphasis on the LOC systems. This was
the enphatic conclusion: "We are unable to devise a bombing campaign in
the North to reduce the flow of infiltrating personnel into SVN." 59/

All that could really be said was that some more optimum employment of
U.S. air resources could be devised in terms of target damage and LOC
disruption. None could reduce the flow even close to the essential mini-
mum for sustaining the war in the South.

After having requested that some portions of the study be
reworked to eliminate errors of logic, Mr. Warnke forwarded the final
version to Secretary McNamara on January 3, 1968 with the information
copies to Secretary Rusk, the Joint Chiefs and CINCPAC. In his memo he
noted the similarity of the conclusions on bombing effectiveness to those
reached not long before in the study by the CIA (see above). Specifically,
Mr. Warnke noted that, “Together with SEA CABIN, the study supports the
proposition that a bombing pause -- even ftr a significant period of time --
would not add appreciably to the strength of our adversary in South Vietnam."
Thus was laid the analytical groundwork for the President's decision to
partially curtail the bombing in March. 61/

3. Systems Analysis Study on Economic Effects

An unrelated but complementary study of the economic effects
of the bombing on North Vietnam was completed by Systems Analysis right
after the New Year and sent-to the Secretary. It too came down hard on
the unproductiveness of the air war, even to the point of suggesting that
jt might be counter-productive in pure economic terms. Enthoven's cover

memo to McNamara stated,

TOP SECRET - Sensitive
127
