Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

at Danang for defense of the airfield and beefing up MACV's
support base. By this time (assumed to be late fall) we
should haye some reading on Khanh's performance.

"Assuming that his performance has been satisfactory
and that Hanoi has failed to respond favorably, it will be
time to embark on the final phase of course of action A,

a carefully orchestrated bombing attack on NVN, directed
primarily at infiltration and other military targets...

"Pros and cons of course of action =~ A. If successful,
course of action A will accomplish the objectives set forth
at the outset as essential to the support of U.S. policy
in South Vietnam. I will press the Khanh Government into
doing its homework in pacification and will limit the di-
version of interest to the out-of-country ventures...
It gives adequate time for careful preparation estimated
at several months, while doing sufficient at once to main-
tain internal morale. It also provides ample warning to
Hanoi and Peking to allow them to adjust their conduct )
before becoming over-committed.

"On the other hand, course of action A relies heavily
upon the durability of the Khanh Government. It assumes
that there is little danger of its collapse without notice
or of its possible replacement by a weaker or more unre-
liable successor .,.Also, because of the drawn-out nature
of the program, it is exposed to the danger of international
political pressure to enter into negotiations before NVN
is really hurting from the pressure directed against it.

"Statement of the Problem -~ B. It may well be that the
problem of U.S, policy in SVN is more urgent than that de- |
picted in the foregoing statement. It is far from clear at
the present moment that the Khanh Government can last until
January 1, 1965, although the epplication of course of action
A should heave the effect of strengthening the Government inter-
nally and of silencing domestic squabbling. If we assume,
however, that we do not have the time available which is
implicit in course of action A (several months), we would
have to restate the problem in the following terms. Our z
objective avoid the possible consequences of a collapse
of National morale. To accomplish these purposes, we would
have to open the campaign against the DRV without delay,
seeking to force Hanoi as rapidly as possible to desist from
aiding the VC and to convince the DRV that it must cooperate
in calling off the VC insurgency.

"Course of action -- B. To meet this statement of the
problem, we need en accelerated course of action, seeking to
