Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

NSc 5429/2, which provided for the maintenance of forces in Indochina
as necessary to assure the internal security of the area, the NSC had
apparently decided the issue in favor of the Secretary of State, the
disagreement between State and Defense continued with an additional
dispute concerning the level of forces to be maintained. In agreeing
to train Cambodian forces, the JCS in effect reasserted their earlier
position vis-a-vis Vietnam:
(
However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff note with concern

the unstable political situation presently existing within

the state of South Vietnam, and accordingly consider that

this is not a propitious time to further indicate United

States intentions with respect to the support and training

of either the Vietnamese regular or police forces. Accord-

ingly, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend against the

assignment of a training mission to MAAG Saigon. 21/

In recommending force levels for Vietnam, the JCS reiterated
the above recommendation and pointed out that the US MAAG would be
- limited by the Geneva cease-fire agreement, that "the development of
the proposed forces...will require extensive and detailed training which
will extend over a period of 3 to 5 years," and that "in view of the
uncertain capabilities of the French and Vietnamese to retrieve, retain,
and reorganize the dispersed forces of Vietnam, it may be several years
before an effective military force will exist. Therefore, U.S. military
support to that area, including the training and equipping of forces,
should be accomplished at low priority and not at the expense of other
U.S. military programs and should not be permitted to impair the develop-
ment through MDA programs of effective and reliable forces elsewhere." 22/

The ses proposed Vietnamese forces of 184,000 (5 divisions of
light infantry ineluding one light artillery battalion per division--
41,000; 12 regiments--24,000; gendarmerie--9,000; Headquarters, Service
and Support forces--110,000), a militia of 50,000, and a small air force
and navy, and proposed that "French forces consisting of a minimum of
h divisions...should be retained in this country until 5 heed out by
U.S.-trained Viet Nam units." 23/

The Secretary of State, still believing in the need for a U,S,
training mission, disagreed with the force levels proposed by the JCS,
considering them excessive to the requirement of maintaining internal
security as expressed in NSC 5429/2. 24/ On 19 October the JCS argued
that their force proposals were justified by the ultimate objectives of
the forces of Vietnam and repeated their opposition, from a military
point of view, to U.S. participation in the training of Vietnamese forces.
Their memorandun concluded, however, by providing the concession the
Department of State must have so eagerly sought:

y TOP SECRET - Sensitive
