Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

for location of the partition line at the 18th parallel. Yet, the French
would never consent to admitting communist control on the borders of both
Cambodia and Laos. The final decision to partition the country at the
17th parallel was, nevertheless, a success to the extent that it provided
the DRV with absolute, unchallenged political control of half of Vietnam --
a situation which the Viet Minh began then to view as the first crucial
step in the series of political moves that would achieve goals commensur-
ate with their military power: the quick political conquest ("liberation")
of the rest of the country.

_C. Election Plans Point to Eventual DRV Domination

In keeping with their desire for haste in achieving an "all-
Vietnamese" political settlement, the Viet Minh, while agreeing to parti-
tion, wanted it to be temporary and to be followed quickly by elections.
The Viet Minh delegates, therefore, had argued that elections should be
held six months after a cease-fire. But, the French retorted elections
should be held 18 months after completion of the regroupment process, or
between 22 and 23 months after the cease-fire. 9/ The compromise, urged
by the USSR and China, accomplished what was in fact the most important
aim of the election talks: the fixing of a date, thus providing insurance
that the elections would take place. In a very real sense, though, the
two year lag gave the GVN invaluable time, and communist strategy on thi
issue seemed to have backfired.

h. The DRV is Satisfied with the Geneva Outcome

The Viet Minh evidently believed -- and no French authority on the
spot doubted this -- that it had the capability to eliminate the French
from Tonkin with one major offensive, and to drive on for further gains
in the South against a weakened, demoralized Franco-Vietnamese army.
Fighting and talking simultaneously was pointed to with approval by the
Viet Minh as a tactic capable of being pursued for two years (like the
Chinese in Korea) in order to assure greater territorial control. Whether
the Viet Minh ultimately envisaged the conquest of all Vietnam before reach-
ing agreement with the French is not known; but, like the French, the Viet
Minh probably regarded maximum control of territory and population as in-
surance against future elections. Reporters covering the Geneva Convention
quoted bitter comments of the DRV delegation after the final meeting, when
the agreements were made public. There is good reason to believe, however,
that, in reality, the Viet Minh were satisfied with the results attained
at Geneva. This satisfaction was based in part on certain miscalculations
on the part of the DRV, which underestimated the future commitment of the
U.S. to the South Vietnamese and which also underestimated the survivability
of Diem and his government. It is apparent that the DRV felt that its
losses at Geneva amounted merely to delays that would set back the time
schedules in Indochina, but that such a payment in time was well worth
the territorial gains and the prevention of Western united action in Viet-
nam. Unlike GVN and U.S. statements during and after Geneva, Viet Minh
representatives publicly supported both the military agreements and the
Final Declaration without qualification.

D-9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
