= . ee ae ee a a
i oem li tephaailionaL 5 —tnerenrmne OY Pane saan
‘

WSO 64/1,

is te

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET

that United States acceptance of the plan is limited to the
logistical support which the United States may agree to furnish,
If- time permits, military representatives of the United Kingdom
2lso might be invited to attend. There should be a timetable to
the plan. Estimates of materiel requirements which the United
States would be expected to provide on an accalerated basis should
also be submitted.

12, Popular support of the Government by the Indochinese
people is essential to a favorable settlement of the security
problem of Indochina, Therefore, as a condition to the provision
of those further increases in military spies fo: ne Indochina
necessary for the implementation of an agreed over-all military

plan, the United States Government should obtain pea raneee from
the French Governinent that:

a. A program providing for the eventual self-government
of Indochina either within or outside of the French Union will
be developed, made public, and implementation initiated at —
once in order to strengthen the national spirit of the Indo-
chinese in opposition to communism;

b. National armies of the Associated States of Indochina
willbe organized as a matter of urgency. While it is doubtful
that the build- up of these armies can be accomplished in time
to contribute significantly to the present military situation,
the direct political and psychological benefits to be derived
from this course would be great and would thus result in
immediate, although indirect, military benefits;

c. Pending the formation and training of Indochinese
national armies as effective units, and as an interim emergency
measure, France will dispatch sufficient additionel ariied
forces to Indochina to insure that the restoration of peace and
internal security in that country will be accomplished in

accordance with the timetable of the over-all military plan for
Indochina; and

‘d. France will change its political and military Seer,
in Indochina to:

(1) Eliminate its policy of "colonialism";

(2) Provide proper tutelage to the Associated States;
and

(3) Insure that a suitable military command structure,
‘ anbanpere d by political interference, is established to
conduct effective and appropriate military operations,

The effective implementation of these changes will hl ae
competent end eff Picient ae. cal end military leaders who will
be able to cope with the conditions in that country.

TOP SECRE my

bi5

a a ee
