Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

12% TOP SECRET - Sensitive

McNamara's Memorandum for the President, which had treated
the POL strikes as a logical extension of the previous interdiction
program into an area in which it might be more remunerative, did not
address these questions of sanctuaries. No other single document has
been located in the available files which does. Pieced together and
deduced from the fragmentary evidence, however, it appears that the
view that POL strikes ran too great a risk of counter-escalation involved
several propositions. One was that the strikes might trigger a tit-for-
tat reprisal (presumably by the VC) against the vulnerable POL stores
near Saigon. The Secretary of Defense had himself made this point as
early as mid-1965 in holding off Congressional and other proponents of
Hanoi /Haiphong area POL strikes, citing the endorsement of General
Westmoreland. 88/ The JCS had recognized the possibility in their
November 1965 paper on POL strikes, although they considered it "of
relatively small potential consequence, minor in comparison to the value
of destruction of the DRV POL system." 89 General Wheeler had also
gone out of his way to allude to it. 90 Under Secretary of State Ball, in
a January 1966 memorandum, saw the possibility of an enemy reprisal in
SVN as only the first act of a measure-countermeasure scenario which could
go spiralling out of control: a VC reprisal against POL in SVN would put
unbearable pressure on the U.S. to counter-retaliate against the North in
some dangerous manner, which in turn would force the other side to react
to that, and so on. 91/

More important than the fear of a VC reprisal, one assumes,
was the belief that the POL sites were the first of the "vital" targets,
high-value per se but also generally co-located with and fronting for
MVN's other high-value targets. NVN, with its "vital" targets attacked
and its economic life at stake, would at a minimum defend itself strenu-
ously (again, provoking us to attack its airfields in our defense, which
in turn might set off an escalatory sequence); or, at the other extreme,
NVN might throw caution to the winds and call on its allies to intervene.
This might be only a limited intervention at first, e.g. use of Chinese
fighters from Chinese bases to protect NVN targets, but even this could
go escalating upward into a full-scale collision with China. On the
other hand, the strikes at the "vital" targets might be the Southeast

Asian equivalent of the march to the Yalu, convince the other side that
the U.S. was embarked on a course intolerable to its own interests, such
as the obliteration of the NVN regime, and cause it to intervene directly. g92/

These arguments were not new, of course; they were arguments
which could be, and no doubt were, used against any bombing at all. They
gained force, however, as the bombing became more intense and the more
the bombing was thought to really hurt Hanoi. (It was an irony of the
original concept of the air war North that the more pressure it really
applied and hence the more successful it was, the more difficult it was

to prosecute. )

91 TOP SECRET = Sensitive
