Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 |

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The President desires that with respect to (these) actions
«--premature publicity be avoided by all possible precautions.
The actions themselves should be taken as rapidly as practicable,
but in ways that should minimize any appearance of sudden changes
in policy, and official statements on these troop movements will
be made only with the direct approval of the Secretary of Defense,
in that these movements and changes should be understood as being
gradual and wholly consistent with existing policy.

Whether and to what extent there was support or opposition to this
step emong top Administration advisers is not recorded in the documenta-
tion available to this writer. But one interesting demurrer was intro-
duced by the Director of Central Intelligence, John A. MeCone, in a
memorandum he circulated on April 2 to Secretary Rusk, Secretary Mciiamara,
McGeorge Bundy, and Ambassador Taylor.

McCone did not inherently disagree with the change in the U.S.
ground force role, but felt that it was inconsistent with the decision
to continue the air strike program at the feeble level-at which it was
then being conducted. McCone developed his argument as follows:

I have been giving thought to the paper that we discussed
in yesterday's meeting, which unfortunately I had little time
to study, and also to the decision made to change the mission
of our ground forces in South Vietnam from one of advice and
static defense to one of active combat operations against the
Viet Cong guerrillas.

I feel that the latter decision is correct only if our air
strikes against the North are sufficiently heavy and damaging
really to hurt the North Vietnamese. The paper we examined
yesterday does not anticipate the type of air operation against
the North necessary to force the NVN to reanpraise their policy.
On the contrary, it states, "We should continue roughly the
present slowly ascending tempo of ROLLING THUNDER operations
----," and later, in outlining the types of targets, states,

_ "The target systems should continue to avoid the effective GCI
range of MIG's,” and these conditions indicate restraints which
will not be persuasive to the NVN and would probably be read
as evidence of a U.S. desire to temporize.

I have reported that the strikes to date have not caused
a change in. the North Vietnamese policy of directing Viet Cong
insurgency, infiltrating cadres and supplying materiel. If
anything, the strikes to date heave hardened their attitude.

I have now had a chance to examine the 12-week program
referred to by General Wheeler and it is my personal opinion
that this program is not sufficiently severe or damaging to
the llorth Vietnamese to cause them to compromise their present
policy. : ,

91 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
