Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

b. U.S. Policy Toward the Conflict, 1947-1949

The U.S. manifested increasing concern over the conflict
in Indochina, but through 1949 American policy continued to regard the
war as fundamentally a matter for French resolution. It is clear on
the record that American policy-makers of the day perceived the vacuity
of French policies in 1946 and 1947. The U.S., in its representations
to France, consistently deplored the prospect of protracted war in
Vietnam, and urged meaningful concessions to Vietnamese nationalism.
However, the U.S. always stopped short of endorsing Ho Chi Minh,
deterred by Ho's history of communist affiliation. Accordingly, U.S.
policy gravitated with that of France toward the Bao Dai solution. At
no point was the U.S. prepared to adopt an openly interventionist
course. To have done so would have clashed with the expressed British
view that Indochina was an exclusively French concern, and played into
the hands of France's extremist political parties of both the Right
and the Left. The U.S. was particularly apprehensive lest by inter-
vening it strengthen the political position of French Communists.
Moreover, in 1946 and 1947, France and Britain were moving toward an
anti-Soviet alliance in Europe, and the U.S. was reluctant to press
a potentially divisive policy. Compared with European recovery, and
escape from communist domination, the U.S. considered the fate of
Vietnamese nationalism relatively insignificant. Further, the dispute
in 1946 and 1945 over the Dutch possession in Indonesia had furnished
& precedent: there the U.S. had moved cautiously, and only after long
delays, to internationalize the conflict. Extensive American ana
British investments in Indonesia, moreover, afforded common ground for
intervention. No similar rationale or commonality existed for inter-
vention in Indochina, since Indochina was almost exclusively a French
economic preserve, and a political morass which the U.K. was mani- r
festly interested in avoiding.

A-he TOP SECRET - Sensitive
