Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Habib, according to reliable sources, told the group that
the Saigon government was generally weaker than had been realized
as a result of the Tet offensive. He related the situation, some
said, with greater frankness than the group had previously heard.

In addition to Habib, Maj. Gen. William E. DePuy, special
assistant to the Joint Chiefs for counterinsurgency and special
activities, briefed the group on the military situation, and
George Carver, a CIA analyst, gave his agency's estimates of con-
ditions in the war zone.

The briefings by DePuy and Carver reflected what many understood
as a dispute over enemy strength between the Defense Department
and the CIA which has been previously reported. Discrepancies in
the figures resulted from the fact that DePuy's estimates of enemy
strength covered only identifiable military units, while Carver's
included all known military, paramilitary and parttime enemy strength
available.

The morning of March 19, the advisory group assembled in the
White House to discuss what they had heard the previous evening
and arrived at their verdict. It was a striking turnabout in
attitude for all but Ball.

After their meeting, the group met the President for lunch.
It was a social affair. No business was transacted. The meal
finished, the advisers delivered their verdict to the President.

Their deliberations produced this verdict for the chief
executive:

Continued escalation of the war--intensified bombing of North
Vietnam and increased American troop strength in the South--would
do no good. Forget about seeking a battlefield solution to the
problem and instead intensify efforts to seek a political solution
at the negotiating table.

He was reportedly greatly surprised at their conclusions.
When he asked them where they had obtained the facts on which the
conclusions were based, the group told him of the briefings by
Habib, DePuy and Carver.

Mr. Johnson knew that the three men had also briefed his
governmental advisers, but he had not received the same picture of
the war as Rostow presented the reports to him.

As a result of the discrepancy, the President ordered his own
direct briefings. At least Habib and DePuy--and almost certainly
Carver--had evening sessions with the President.

73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
