Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"For Viet-Nam's economic growth, the acquisition of capital is
vitally necessary. Now, the nation could create the capital needed
for growth by stealing from the already meager rice bowls of its people
and regimenting them into work battalions. This enslevement is the
commune system-~adopted by the new overlords of Red China. It would
mean, of course, the loss of freedom within the country without any
hostile outside actior whatsoever.

"Another way for Viet-llam to get the necessary capital is through
private investments from the outside, and through governmental loans
and, where necessary, grants from other and more fortunately situated
nations.

"tn either of these ways the economic problem of Viet-Nam could be
solved. But only the second way can preserve freedom.

"And there is still the other of Viet-Nam's great problems--how
+o support the military forces it needs without crushing its economy.

"Because of the proximity: of large Communist military formations
in the North, Free Viet-Nam must maintain substential numbers of men
under arms. Moreover, while the government has shown real progress in
cleaning out Communist guerrillas, those remaining continue to be a
disruptive influence in the nation's life.

"Unassisted, Viet-Nam cannot at this time produce and support the
military formations essential to it, or, equally important, the morale--
the hope, the confidence, the pride--necessary to meet the dual threat
of aggression from without and subversion within its borders.

"Still another fact! Strategically, South Viet- Nam's capture by
the Communists would bring their power several hundred miles into a
hitherto free region. The remaining countries in Southeast Asia would
be menaced by a great flanking movement. The freedom of twelve million
people would be lost- immediately, and that of 150 million others in ad-
jacent lands would be seriously endangered. The loss of South Viet-Nem
would set in motion a crumbling process that could, as it progressed,
have grave consequences for us and for freedom.

"Viet-Nam must have a reasonable degree of safety now--both for her
people and for her property. Because of these facts, ia ie as well
as economic help is currently needed in Viet-lam.

"We reach tne inescapable conclusion that our own national interests
demand some help from us in sustaining in Viet-Nam the morale, the eco-
nomic progress, snd the acon ue strength necessary to its continued
existence in freedom.

; : B-h9
