Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

TOP SECRET - Sensitive

au

THE TONKIN GULF CRISIS

Several of the pressuring measures recommended to the White House
in May or June were implemented in conjunction with or in the immediate
aftermath of naval action in the Tonkin Gulf. It is this fact and the
rapidity with which these measures were taken that has led critics to
doubt some aspects of the public account of the Tonkin incidents. It is
also this fact, together with later Administration assessments of the
Tonkin Gulf experience, that give the incidents greater Significance
than the particular events seemed at first to warrant.

THE FIRST INCIDENT

What happened in the Gulf? As noted earlier, U.S.S. MADDOX com-
menced the second DE SOTO Patrol on 31 July. On the prior night South
Vietnamese coastal patrol forces made a midnight attack, including an
amphibious "commando" raid, on Hon Me and Hon Nieu Islands, about 19° N.
latitude. At the time of this attack, U.S.S. MADDOX was 120-130 miles
away just heading into waters off North Vietnam. On 2 August, having
reached the northernmost point on its patrol track and having headed
South, the destroyer was intercepted by three North Vietnamese patrol
boats. Apparently, these boats and a fleet of junks had moved into the
area near the island to search for the attacking force and had mistaken
Maddox for a South Vietnamese escort vessel. (Approximately eleven hours
earlier, while on a northerly heading, Maddox had altered course to avoid
the junk concentration shown on her radar; about six hours after that --
now headed South -- Maddox had altered her course to the southeast to
avoid the junks a second time.) When the PT boats began their high-speed
run at her, at a distance of approximately 10 miles, the destroyer was
28 miles from the coast and heading farther into international waters.

Two of the boats closed to within 5,000 yards, Jaunching one torpedo each.
As they approached, Maddox fired on the boats with her 5-inch batteries

and altered course to avoid the torpedoes, which were observed passing

the starboard side at a distance of 100 to 200 yards. The third boat

moved up abeam of the destroyer and took a direct 5-inch hit; it managed
to launch a torpedo which failed to run. All three PT boats fired 50-
caliber machine guns at Maddox as they made their firing runs, and a bullet
_ fragment was recovered from the destroyer's superstructure. The attacks
occurred in mid-afternoon, and photographs were taken of the torpedo boats
as they attacked. 20/

Upon first report of the PT boats' apparently hostile intent, four
F-SE aircraft were launched from the aircraft carrier Ticonderoga, many
miles to the South, with instructions to provide air cover but not to
fire unless they or Maddox were fired upon. AS Maddox continued in a
southerly direction, Piconderoga's aircraft attacked the two boats that
had initiated the action. Both were damaged with Zuni rockets and 20mm
gunfire. The third boat, struck by the destroyer'’s 5-inch, was already

2 : TOP SECRET - Sensitive
